Association Between Age and Familial Risk for Alcoholism on Functional Connectivity in Adolescence
Objective:
Youth with a family history of alcohol use disorder (family history positive [FHP]) are at increased risk for developing maladaptive substance use relative to family history negative (FHN) peers. Building on earlier studies demonstrating morphological differences and distinct patterns of neural activation in FHP, the purpose of the present study was to investigate differential intrinsic functional connectivity among brain networks indexing premorbid risk of developing alcohol use disorder (AUD).
Method:
The current study examined intrinsic functional connectivity using resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging in 191 adolescents 13 to 18 years of age with and without family history of AUD via independent component analysis, a method enabling data-driven investigation of internetwork and intranetwork connectivity among brain regions at rest.
Results:
Analyses revealed significantly lower intranetwork connectivity in FHP compared to FHN participants between the dorsal premotor cortex and other sensorimotor network regions. Reduced intranetwork connectivity in this region was further correlated with the number of biological family members with AUD and mood disorders. Robust differences were also evident in internetwork connectivity as a function of age. However, there was no evidence for family history by age interactions.
Conclusion:
Intra- but not internetwork connectivity appears to differentiate FHP and FHN adolescents, whereas age differences within adolescence are marked by differences in internetwork connectivity.
It has long been established that alcohol use disorders (AUDs) cluster in families and involve a genetic contribution. Youth with a family history of alcohol use are at greater risk for developing disordered alcohol use relative to the general population, and, more specifically, individuals with a greater density of family members with AUDs are more likely to develop AUDs themselves. Youth with a family history of AUDs have a higher prevalence of alcohol dependence and engage in more severe consumption patterns.
Substance-naive FHP youth demonstrate a variety of differences relative to participants without a family history of AUDs, including reductions in cortical thickness and gray matter volume, as well as reduced volume in nucleus accumbens and other subcortical regions. Alcohol-naive FHP adolescents and young adults also exhibit reduced inhibitory response (eg, reduced activation in left middle frontal gyrus) as well as atypical activation of reward processing and executive function regions. Overall, previous work implicates multiple interacting neurological systems in increased risk of FHP youth for developing maladaptive alcohol use, including regions involved in executive function, cognitive control, and reward processing. Therefore, underlying neurobiological risk may reflect atypical functional connectivity patterns between cortical and subcortical brain regions.
Although some prior work has examined task-based functional connectivity in FHP individuals, research examining resting state connectivity and focusing on intrinsic functional brain networks in FHP participants has been limited. Using aggregated task data to index inherent connectivity, Herting et al. demonstrated reduced functional connectivity between the cerebellum and bilateral anterior prefrontal cortices among FHP youth (n = 13) relative to FHN participants (n = 14), reinforcing previous findings of atypical cognitive control in FHPs. Cservenka et al. demonstrated reduced connectivity among the left NAcc, left postcentral gyrus, and bilateral inferior frontal gyri using resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) in a sample of 97 youth (n = 47 family history positive, n = 50 family history negative). These findings suggest suboptimal coordination of appetitive and reward networks with those implicated in cognitive control, consistent with the increased risk of these youth for engaging in risky, reward-driven behaviors, including alcohol use.
The studies described above are based on seed-based rsfMRI connectivity analyses. Although seed-based techniques allow targeted examination of specific hypotheses, they necessarily narrow the scope of investigation due to a priori seed specification, negating investigation of connectivity throughout the whole brain. By contrast, intrinsic connectivity, examined via the pattern of signal change among multiple brain regions over the course of rsfMRI, yields information about coactivation among regions throughout the brain and enables investigation of associations both within and across networks. Moving beyond a seed-based approach, Holla et al. recently conducted a whole-brain, graph theory analysis and reported disrupted connectivity in frontoparietal, cinguloopercular, sensorimotor, and cerebellar regions in a sample of 30 FHN and 30 FHP participants.
Taken together, these results point to the possibility of altered connectivity in multiple brain networks in FHP participants. However, the extent to which family history differences relate to and interact with age-related differences in functional connectivity remains unclear. Although various risky behaviors, including alcohol use, often emerge or peak during adolescence, this trend may depend on the age of the adolescent sample. Consequently, even across a relatively circumscribed age range, there may be age-related differences in functional connectivity, and age may moderate group differences in rsfMRI connectivity. Furthermore, connections between subcortical and cortical areas have been shown to decrease with age, whereas connections among cortical areas tend to increase. However, others have reported decreased correspondence between anatomically proximate brain regions and increased correspondence between anatomically distal regions among adults compared to children, suggesting that more work is needed to understand age-related changes in intrinsic connectivity, especially within the adolescent age range, and in relation to familial risk.
The current study expanded work in this area by examining intrinsic functional connectivity in a large sample of youth with and without family history of AUDs via independent component analysis (ICA), a method enabling data-driven, exploratory investigation of temporal correlations among brain regions at rest. Both internetwork and intranetwork connectivity were investigated to explore potential associations among family history and age with regard to synchrony among specific brain regions as well as between larger networks of regions. Importantly, we investigated 3 age groups of FHP and FHN participants— individuals 13 to 14 years, 15 to 16 years, and 17 to 18 years of age—to investigate the main effects of age in rsfMRI networks and to examine potential interactions between age and family history status (FHP versus FHN). Investigation of potential risk markers, such as altered internetwork and intranetwork connectivity, among large, well-characterized samples spanning the adolescent age range, as in the current work, is critical to better characterize factors contributing to the onset of maladaptive alcohol use among at-risk youth and to subsequently improve prevention and intervention efforts.
METHOD
Participants
Participants were 191 adolescents 13 to 18 years of age recruited via advertisements to the local community, through university e-mail listings, and from an additional ongoing study (Collaborative Studies on Genetics of Alcoholism [COGA]). The current study is part of a larger project on brain maturation and participant recruitment, for which inclusion/exclusion criteria, and participant characteristics have been previously reported. All participants were right-handed and had an IQ of 80 or higher as determined by the brief form of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence. Table 1 provides demographic information. To be included in the study, participants were required to screen negative for severe head injury, severe headaches, seizures, stroke, or brain surgery; metal in the body; and history of psychiatric or neurological disorders with the exception of externalizing disorders (EDs) including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, oppositional-defiant disorder, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder assessed using the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism (SSAGA). FHN participants (n = 96) were required to meet all of the above criteria for study participation in addition to lacking a biological parent with AUD and were also required to not have a history of ED. FHP and FHN participants were matched according to age (binned into 3 groups: 13 to 14 years, 15 to 16 years, and 17 to 18 years of age) and biological sex.
FHP participants (n = 95) had to have at least 1 biological parent screen positive (≥3 DSM-IV abuse or dependence items) for a history of AUD on the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism IV (SSAGA) interview. If the affected parent was unavailable for interview, the Family History Assessment Module (FHAM) was used with the other biological parent or the adolescent participant (if he/she was 18 years of age) as the informant. Participants in the FHN group were required to have both biological parents screen negative for AUD using the FHAM. The Family History Research Diagnostic Criteria (FHRDC) scale was administered to determine the number of first- and second-degree family members with AUD and mood disorders. Participants were excluded if their mothers reported having more than three drinks of alcohol per week at any point during pregnancy. The highest education level of the participant’s two parents was used as a proxy for socioeconomic status. Past or current use of substances other than alcohol, marijuana, and tobacco was exclusionary for FHP and FHN groups. Problem level use (scores > 7) on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) or the Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST) of alcohol, marijuana, and tobacco was also exclusionary.
Measures
Neuropsychological tests assessing spatial working memory and executive functioning were administered using the Computerized Multiphasic Interactive Neuropsychological DualDisplay System (CMINDS) (http://www.neurocomp.com/Solutions/Cminds). The following computerized tests were administered: Trail Making Test Parts A and B (a measure of visual attention and task switching), Digit Span Forward and Backward (verbal working memory), and Visuospatial Sequencing Test Forward and Reverse (visuospatial working memory). The Visuospatial Sequencing Test was added after data collection had already begun, so these data are available for only 89 FHP (92.7%) and 81 FHN (84.4%) participants. Mean differences between groups have previously been reported by Henderson et al. Consequently, we report here correlations between connectivity and performance on these measures.
Image Acquisition
Imaging was performed on a 3T Siemens (Erlangen, Germany) Trio MRI scanner equipped with a 12-channel head coil. A total of 32 slices 4 mm thick (in plane resolution 3.4 mm × 3.4 mm) were acquired using a T2* sensitive echoplanar imaging sequence (TR = 2000 milliseconds, TE = 30 milliseconds, flip angle = 77°). The resting state scan was acquired first and consisted of one run lasting 5 minutes 24 seconds. Before completing resting state scans, participants were told to lie in the scanner with eyes closed while thinking of nothing in particular. An MP-RAGE T1-weighted scan was also acquired for coregistration purposes (TR = 2300 milliseconds, TE = 2.82 milliseconds, flip angle = 10 degrees, series = interleaved). Participants were familiarized with the scanning procedure using an MRI simulator prior to the actual MRI scan.
Preprocessing
Preprocessing was completed in AFNI and involved the following: (1) volume registration, (2) despiking, (3) spatial normalization to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using a 12-parameter affine model, (4) reslicing all data to 3-mm isotropic voxels, and (5) spatial smoothing (8mm FWHM). Participant motion was estimated using AFNI’s enorm function (https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/program_help/1d_tool.py.html), which is similar to framewise displacement. Displacement in millimeters for three directions and three rotations from one volume to the next were calculated and then a median value created for each participant.
Independent Components Analysis
Spatial ICA was performed using GIFT on preprocessed data for all participants. As implemented in GIFT, ICA identifies networks of brain regions with temporally correlated oscillations. The joint fMRI data from the participants is structured by a temporal concatenation approach that assumes a common aggregate spatial map (ie, common funcitonal anatomy) but allows for participant-specific differences in the time-dependent networks signals. Initial data reduction was achieved using a two-step standard principal components analysis process (participant- and group-level, as described by Erhardt et al.) with the full covariance matrix computed from stacked data sets in conjunction with packed storage, single precision, and selective eigen computation options available in GIFT. Resting state time series data were normalized by removing the image mean per timepoint. ICA was conducted using the FastICA algorithm, selecting the symmetrical approach, tanh nonlinearity, and stabilization parameters in GIFT. Algorithmic reliability was also evaluated because the methods used here are stochastic and iterative, such that model solutions vary across runs. Using ICASSO, each ICA was repeated 20 times to evaluate the reliability and stability of resultant components through bootstrapping and use of random start points (1,000 iterations). This step yields Iq values indexing compactness (solution variability across runs) and isolation (analogous to solution uniqueness) of component clusters. Iq values were satisfactory for all components (Iq range:.568–.999).
Finally, back-reconstruction was conducted via GICA, consistent with principal components analysis-based data-reduction methods employed in initial stages of the ICAs and with the low model order of the present analyses (in line with recommendations described in the GIFT manual, version 4.0, released in May 2015).
Component Extraction
As in earlier work and in keeping with recommendations by Calhoun and de Lacy, 75 components were extracted. Individual components were reviewed and components that (1) had low power in the canonical 0.01 to 0.15 Hz frequency spectrum, (2) had signal primarily in white matter or cerebrospinal fluid, or (3) had motion-related “ringing” artifact present on the images were discarded. Specifically, all components were reviewed by three of the authors (A.E., A.W., and J.V.). Ratings were made on a 3-point scale (1 = retain; 2 = consider retaining, 3 = reject). Only components that had at least two retain votes and no reject votes were ultimately included. This approach resulted in 29 retained components (Figure 1). Components were labeled based on anatomical regions involved and correspondence to other ICA-based network results.
Intranetwork and Internetwork Connectivity Analyses
Finally, intranetwork and internetwork connectivity were examined via the MANCOVAN toolbox available in GIFT. Temporal synchrony between component networks (ie, internetwork connectivity) was examined via functional network connectivity (FNC) correlations. FNC correlations allow inferences regarding coordinated activity between networks of interest (indexed by internetwork temporal synchrony) and potential associations among these indices and group, the number of first- and second-degree family members with an AUD, age, sex, and parental education level. In computing FNC correlations, network timecourses were detrended (filter cutoff = 0.15 Hz) but were not despiked to avoid redundancy with the initial preprocessing stage. Subsequently, correlations were computed between timecourses between components.
Temporal synchrony within component networks (ie, intranetwork connectivity) was examined via spatial maps, indexing the contribution of the time course to each voxel comprising a given component. Significant effects revealed in spatial maps are therefore interpreted as reflecting either heightened or reduced functional connectivity of a given voxel with respect to other voxels comprising a given component. All spatial maps were centered for ease of interpretation; all other parameters selected were identical to those for FNC correlations.
Main effects for family history group, age (13 – 14, 15 – 16, 17 – 18 years), and sex were included in the initial model. Subsequent follow-up analyses explored family history × age and family history × sex interactions. False discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons was applied to the group ICA analyses (corrected p = .05). For intranetwork connectivity, FDR was applied for each component. For internetwork connectivity, FDR was applied to the group comparison of the FNC correlations. Associations between significant connectivity findings and neuropsychological performance on the Trails A, Trails B, Digit Span, and Visuospatial Sequencing tests were explored. Finally, for significant differences between family history groups, follow-up analyes were computed to determine whether these results were associated with number of first- and second-degree family members with AUD and/or mood disorders.
RESULTS
Independent Components Analysis
The final 29 components retained for analyses are presented in Figure 1. Of these components, 2 comprised auditory (18, 38) brain regions and one component represented the basal ganglia (16). There was one component focused on the cerebellum (32). Two components reflected default mode network areas (6, 23) whereas 6 comprised executive control network regions (22, 27, 29, 42, 65, 68). There were an additional 6 that focused on the frontal lobe (11, 30, 31, 36, 60, 61) and one that included the salience network (52). Finally, 4 components indexed sensorimotor areas (7, 8, 9, 28) and 6 components comprised visual processing regions of the occipital lobe (12, 15, 39, 58, 69, 73).
Intranetwork and Internetwork Connectivity: Age
Significant effects of age emerged with regard to internetwork but not intranetwork connectivity when examining functional connectivity indices as a function of age, sex, and family history group (Figure 2). Specifically, spatial maps did not suggest differences in intranetwork connectivity with participant age after applying FDR correction. However, there were significant differences in internetwork connectivity between the younger (age 13 – 14 years) and older (age 17 – 18 years) participants. As shown in Figure 2, the group 17 to 18 years of age showed higher connectivity among several different components. For instance, the auditory components had stronger connectivity to various networks including executive, frontal, sensorimotor, and visual components. In addition, sensorimotor components were strongly connected with visual components. Finally, executive control components showed stronger connectivity with visual and frontal components. There were some cases in which the group 13 to 14 years of age had stronger connectivity, primarily between cerebellum components and other brain regions.
Intranetwork and Internetwork Connectivity: Family History
No significant associations emerged between FNC correlations reflecting internetwork connectivity and family history status, although there was one significant effect for intranetwork connectivity after FDR correction. Within a sensorimotor network (comonent 9), FHP participants showed lower intranetwork connectivity compared to FHN individuals (Figure 3). The focus point is within the precentral gyrus and corresponds to premotor cortex near Brodmann area 6 (BA6) (x = 23.5, y = 21.5, z = 62.5). This effect was significant after controlling for parental education and after controlling for IQ (see Figures S1 and S2, available online). There were no significant main effects for age on intranetwork connectivity. Also, there were no significant effects for intranetwork or internetwork connectivity for age group × family history. In addition, although there were significant main effects for sex on intranetwork and internetwork connectivity (see Figures S3 and S4, available online), there was no sex × family history group interaction.
Additional analyses were conducted to examine the role of maternal alcohol and drug use on the intranetwork connectivity finding. Five FHP participants had mothers who reported using alcohol during pregnancy. After excluding these participants, FHP still showed lower connectivity in BA6. Similarly, after removing the three participants whose mothers reported using marijuana or other drugs during pregnancy, the results show similar patterns of connectivity differences (see Figures S5 and S6, available online).
To determine whether the number of first- and second-degree relatives with alcohol and other mental health problems correlated with sensorimotor network connectivity within the premotor cortex region, partial correlations were computed between intranetwork connectivity within this region in relation to the number of first- and second-degree relatives with AUD, mood disorders, and anxiety disorders, controlling for age bin and sex. Number of first-degree relatives with AUD was not correlated with connectivity [r(90) = −0.03, p = .809], but connectivity was correlated with number of second-degree relatives with AUD [r(90) = −0.24, p = .023]. Number of first degree relatives with mood disorders was also negatively correlated with connectivity [r(90) = −0.22, p = .034]. The other correlations with connectivity were not significant (all p > .05).
Finally, correlations were computed to examine associations between sensorimotor connectivity in component 9 with neuropsychological measures. In the FHP group, there was a negative correlation between Trails A performance time [r(78) = −0.33, p = .003], indicating that greater connectivity was associated with faster Trails A performance. The component 9-Trails A correlation for FHN participants was not signficiant [r(86) = −0.06, p =.584]. Also, none of the other measures of neuropsychological performance significantly correlated with connectivity in this region in either group (all p > .05).
DISCUSSION
Investigating neurobiological processes in FHP individuals is an important approach for identifying risk factors for developing AUD. Several studies have identified differences in brain activation or brain morphology in specific neuroanatomical regions. Henderson et al. previously reported differences in brain morphometry—lower cortical thickness in portions of the frontal and parietal cortex—as well as poorer visuospataial (but not verbal) working memory in the FHP compared to FHN groups. In the present study, we used a data-driven, whole-brain approach that provides a method for examining connectivity within and between networks.
In our sample of 95 FHP and 96 FHN participants, connectivity between BA6 and the rest of the sensorimotor network was weaker in FHP compared to FHN participants. Among FHP participants, a greater number of second-degree family members with AUD was associated with reduced connectivity within this region. These results are somewhat consistent with our earlier finding demonstrating that FHP participants had reduced cortical thickness in the frontal lobe in this sample. However, it is notable that the functional connectivity finding in the present study was in the premotor cortex, whereas cortical thickness differences were most prominent in the dorsolateral and orbitofrontal cortex. This suggests that differences in connectivity are not strongly related to cortical thickness or that lower cortical thickness in adjacent, functionally connected regions could lead to reduced connectivity within this specific region.
The BA6 region of the precentral gyrus implicated in the current study is part of the dorsal premotor cortex, suggesting that altered connectivity may contribute to differences in motor behaviors. In this sample, we previously reported group differences in visuospatial working memory. FHP and FHN groups also showed differences on Trails B (participant switches between number and letter; A-1; B-2; C-3, etc.) but not on Trails A (participant connects numbers rapidly in sequential order). Trails A may index basic visuomotor task performance, whereas Trails B may tap higher-order executive functions. Interestingly, Trails A performance was the only measure that correlated with connectivity within this region, possibly indicating that altered connectivity may contribute to deficits on some tasks that rely primarily on motor performance. It is important to note that the portions of the precentral gyrus, especially dorsal components, are known to play an important role in cognitive, as opposed to purely motor, processes. For instance, Hanakawa et al. demonstrated that this region is involved in mental operations that did not require overt movement. Consequently, it is possible that some cognitive tasks that were not included in the present study—for instance, mental imagery, may also be affected. Future studies in FHP individuals should include a range of visuomotor tasks that may help to better isolate the specific task deficits that may arise from altered connectivity within this network.
Although our results, as well as previous findings, point to potential differences in functional connectivity in FHP children, linking functional connectivity and other brain measures specifically to AUD risk is challenging, given other differences that may exist between FHP and FHN children. In our sample, parents of FHP children had lower education levels in comparison to parents of FHN chidren. Follow-up analyses indicated that parental education differences did not account for differences in functional connectivity. Nevertheless, there may be other environmental variables not assessed here (eg, family income, housing status) that may account for differences in functional connectivity. In addition, future studies should examine the degree to which connectivity differences in FHPs are specific to having a parent with AUD or generalize to other forms of substance use disorders in the parents.
This sensorimotor network connectivity finding is consistent with other studies that have found deficits in regions involved in motor behavior in FHPs. Interestingly, functional connectivity appears to be reduced in participants with AUD in BA6 and other regions implicated in motor behaviors; however, in AUD, the reductions in connectivity appear to be more pronounced and additionally include fronto-parietal networks implicated in executive control. Although more research is clearly warranted, these results suggest that lower excecutive control related connectivity may manifest after years of problematic alcohol use but may not necessarily be present in high-risk, FHP youth. The family history effect appears to be substantially weaker and largely independent of the robust age differences in internetwork connectivity found in this sample. We found differences in internetwork connectivity between the groups 13 to 14 years and 17 to 18 years of age, indicating that although the basic pattern of resting state networks is well established by adolescence, the strength of correlation between networks continues to change over a few short years. The general pattern of results points to greater connectivity between networks in the older age group. However, the cerebellum appears to have very different internetwork connectivity in the two age groups. In the group 13 to 14 years versus 17 to 18 year of age, connectivity was higher between the cerebellum network and sensory/sensorimotor areas. On the other hand, in the group 17 to 18 years versus 13 to 14 years of age, cerebellum connectivity was higher with frontal lobe networks. This could imply a shift in cerebellar connectivity patterns from basic sensorimotor to higher-order cognitive functions. These results are consistent with a recent study that found age differences in cerebellar connectivity; maturation was associated with a shift from cerebellar sensorimotor connectivity to cerebellar cortical connectivity. We did not obtain evidence for a family history × age group effect, suggesting that the basic pattern of age differences in internetwork connectivity was similar for both FHP and FHN groups.
These findings should be considered within the context of the following potential limitations. First, potential motion-related noise in the neuroimaging data may have influenced the results of ICA and subsequent examination of functional connectivity indices. However, careful pre-inspection of neuroimaging data was undertaken to eliminate artifacts, and ICA parses out noise-related variance when delineating components. FHP and FHN groups did differ on parental education, and although controlling for education did not alter the connectivity difference, it will be important for future studies to match FHN to FHP on education and other related variables. In addition, although our cross-sectional analyses found evidence for age differences in connectivity, a longitudinal design would be better suited to examine change in connectivity as a function of age and in relation to family history. Also, although we examined associations between number of family members with AUD and functional connectivity, we did not assess family history of other drug use disorders. Similarly, although we collected retrospective information from mothers about alcohol and drug use during pregnancy, a more extensive interview with the mothers may have provided additional information about substance use during pregnancy, potentially allowing for a more systematic investigation between family history, maternal use of alcohol and other drugs during pregnancy, and brain connectivity. From the data that we did have available, the reduced connectivity in the FHP group in premotor cortex was not modified after removing participants whose mothers reported alcohol or other drug use during pregnancy. In terms of substance use in the adolescent participants themselves, our inclusion criteria allowed some degree of alcohol, marijuana, and tobacco use, as these substances are commonly used during adolescence. Nevertheless, it is conceivable that some modest amount of past use may have altered functional connectivity. Future studies should study FHP children prior to adolescence when there is no substance use history. Indeed, some brain measures may show a more striking difference between FHP and FHN participants prior to adolescence. Our resting state scan, albeit at least as long as other resting state studies in FHP individuals, could have benefited from longer duration. Finally, because we used a data-driven ICA approach to examine connectivity across the entire set of brain voxels, we did not focus on specific brain regions. In addition, unlike region of interest based approaches, it is not possible to “scrub” individual time points of high motion data, as these analyses require all participants to have an equal number of time points of fMRI data.
With these caveats in mind, our study, which to date is the largest study of resting state connectivity in FHP and FHN participants, found evidence for reduced sensorimotor network connectivity, a finding that was related to the number of family members with alcohol use and mood disorders. At the same time, family history group differences in connectivity were much weaker than the large number of internetwork connectivity differences that were found comparing participants 13 to 14 years of age to those 17 to 18 years of age. Consequently, relatively subtle differences in connectivity in FHP individuals may appear to be independent of age-related changes in the connectome.
Future studies using longitudinal designs and focusing on preadolescent participants would be able to identify when the altered connectivity patterns emerge, and what the behavioral and cognitive consequences are for these functional connectivity alterations.
Supplementary Material
Disclosure: Dr. Vaidya has reported owning shares in Sun Genomics. Dr. Langbehn has received personal fees from Roche Pharmaceuticals, Voyager, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and Wave Life Sciences. He has served as a consultant to CHDI Foundation, a Huntington Disease foundation. Dr. Kuperman has received compensation from Neurocrine, which was involved in development of medication for Tourette’s Disorder. Drs. Kramer and O’Leary, Ms. Elmore, and Mr. Wallace report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
The familial incidence of alcoholism: a review
Development of alcoholism in adoptees raised apart from alcoholic biologic relatives
Family density of alcoholism and onsent of adolescent drinking
The impact of a family history of alcoholism on the relationship between age at onset of alcohol use and DSM-IV alcohol dependence
Trajectories of alcohol and drug use and dependence from adolescence to adulthood: the effects of familial alcoholism and personality
Cortical thickness in adolescents with a family history of alcohol use disorder
Differentiating the effects of familial risk for alcohol dependence and prenatal exposure to alcohol on offspring brain morphology
Family history density of alcoholism relates to left nucleus accumbens volume in adolescent girls
Amygdala volume in offspring from multiplex for alcohol dependence families: the moderating influence of childhood environment and 5-HTTLPR variation
An fMRI study of response inhibition in youths with a family history of alcoholism
Accumbens functional connectivity during reward mediates sensation seeking and alcohol use in high-risk youth
Frontoparietal connectivity in substance-naive youth with and without a family history of alcoholism
Neural circuitry associated with risk for alcohol use disorders
Family history of alcohol use disorders and neuromaturation: a functional connectivity study with adolescents
Altered fronto-cerebellar connectivity in alcohol-naïve youth with a family history of alcoholism
Resting state functional connectivity of the nucleus accumbens in youth with a family history of alcoholism
Disrupted resting brain graph measures in individuals at high risk for alcoholism
A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking
Development of large-scale functional brain networks in children
Functional brain networks develop from a “local to distributed” organization
A method for making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis
The genetics of alcoholism: identifying specific genes through family studies

A new, semi-structured psychiatric interview for use in genetic linkage studies: a report of the reliability of the SSAGA
The family history method using diagnostic criteria. Reliability and validity
AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion

Comparison of multi-subject ICA methods for analysis of fMRI data
A fast fixed-point algorithm for independent component analysis
Validating the independent components of neuroimaging time series via clustering and visualization
Resting-state functional network connectivity in prefrontal regions differs between unmedicated patients with bipolar and major depressive disorders
Ten Key Observations on the analysis of resting-state functional MR imaging data using independent component analysis
A baseline for multivariate comparison of resting-state networks
Thresholding of statistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate
Neurobiological phenotypes associated with a family history of alcoholism
The role of rostral Brodmann area 6 in mental-operation tasks: an integrative neuroimaging approach
Distinctions between dorsal and ventral premotor areas: anatomical connectivity and functional properties
Alterations of resting state functional network connectivity in the brain of nicotine and alcohol users
Reduced left executive control network functional connectivity is associated with alcohol use disorders
A comprehensive study of whole-brain functional connectivity in children and young adults
Asynchronous development of cerebellar, cerebello-cortical, and cortico-cortical functional networks in infancy, childhood, and adulthood
Developmental delay in P300 production in children at high risk for developing alcohol-related disorders
The effect of scan length on the reliability of resting-state fMRI connectivity estimates
Components Derived From Group Independent Components Analysis (ICA)
Note:AUD = auditory; BG = basal ganglia; Cereb = cerebellum; DMN = default mode network; Exec = executive control; SM = sensorimotor; VIS = visual. Please note color figures are available online.
Internetwork Connectivity Differences Between Groups 17 to 18 Years Versus 13 to 14 Years of Age
Note: Main effect for age group comparing participants 17 to 18 years versus 13 to 14 years of age (false discovery rate [FDR] corrected). Hotter colors reflect higher conectiity between two components in the group 17 to 18 years of age. Cooler colors reflect connectivity that is higher in the group 13 to 14 years of age. Results are collapsed across family history group. AUD = auditory; BG = basal ganglia; CER = cerebellum; DMN = default mode network; EXEC = executive control; SM = sensorimotor; VIS = visual. Please note color figures are available online.
Intranetwork Connectivity Differences Between Groups With or Without Family History of Alcohol Use Disorders
Note: Connectivity in premotor cortex to other regions of a sensorimotor network was lower in FHP adolescents compared to FHN participants. FH = family history; FHP = family history positive; FHP = family history negative. Please note color figures are available online.
Descriptive and Demographic Statistics for Groups With and Without Family History of Alcohol Use Disorders
	FHN	FHP	Statistic	P	 	Age, y	15.45 (1.72)	15.46 (1.70)	t = 0.08	.933	 	Sex (male/female), number	48/48	47/48	χ2 = 0.005	.942	 	Parental Education	5.75 (1.44)	4.84 (2.00)	t = 3.62	<.001	 	IQ	115.2 (9.02)	108.51 (10.98)	t = 4.79	<.001	 	Externalizing Symptoms	1.24 (2.75)	3.41 (4.87)	t = −3.68	<.001	 	Depressive Symptoms	0.33 (1.41)	1.16 (2.56)	t = −2.69	.009	 	Head motion, mm	0.096 (0.042)	0.094 (.043)	t = 0.26	.793	 	Alcohol Use					 	 Number reporting any use	11	20	χ2 = 3.23	.072	 	 AUDIT score	2.73 (1.13)	3.5 (1.59)	t = −1.15	.26	 	Tobacco Use					 	 Number reporting any use	7	10	χ2 = 0.62	.432	 	 ASSIST tobacco score	1.86 (.38)	4.60 (4.03)	t = −1.78	.096	 	Marijuana Use					 	 Number reporting any use	7	10	χ2 = 0.62	.432	 	 ASSIST marijuana score	1.86 (2.27)	5.80 (4.37)	t = −2.18	.046	 		 	
Note: IQ estimated from Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI). Parental education was rated on a scale ranging from high school (0) to doctoral degree (8). Values reflect means unless otherwise indicated. SDs are provided in parentheses. Head motion reflects median of motion estimates in millimeters across all timepoints. ASSIST = Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test; AUDIT = Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test; FHP = family history positive; FHP = family history negative.
