Brain Circuitry Associated with the Development of Substance Use in Bipolar Disorder and Preliminary Evidence for Sexual Dimorphism in Adolescents
Substance use disorders (SUDs) and mood disorders are highly comorbid and confer a high risk for adverse outcomes. However, data are limited on the neurodevelopmental basis of this comorbidity. Substance use initiation typically occurs during adolescence and sex-specific developmental mechanisms are implicated. In this preliminary study we review the literature and investigate regional gray matter volume (GMV) associated with subsequent substance use problems in adolescents with bipolar disorder (BD) and explore these associations for females and males.
Thirty DSM-IV diagnosed BD adolescents with minimal alcohol/substance exposure completed baseline structural magnetic resonance imaging scans. At follow-up (on average 6 years post-baseline), subjects were administered the CRAFFT interview and categorized into those scoring at high (>2: CRAFFTHIGH) versus low (<2: CRAFFTLOW) risk for alcohol/substance problems.
Lower GMV in prefrontal, insular, and temporopolar cortices were observed at baseline among adolescents with BD reporting subsequent alcohol and cannabis use compared to adolescents with BD who did not (p<0.005, clusters >20 voxels). Lower dorsolateral prefrontal GMV was associated with future substance use in both females and males. In females, lower orbitofrontal and insula GMV was associated with future substance use; while in males, lower rostral prefrontal GMV was associated with future use. Lower orbitofrontal, insular and temporopolar GMV was observed in those who transitioned to smoking tobacco. Findings indicate GMV development is associated with risk for future substance use problems in adolescents with BD, with results implicating GMV development in regions subserving emotional regulation in females and regions subserving executive processes and attention in males.
Graphical abstract
This study demonstrates regional gray matter volume decreases that may distinguish adolescents with Bipolar Disorder and elevated risk for future substance use problems. Preliminary findings suggest in females, regions associated with internalizing behavior and affective processing are related to risk; in males, regions associated with attention and other executive processes.
INTRODUCTION
Mood disorders and substance use disorders (SUDs) have most often been studied as distinct conditions, yet evidence suggests most individuals with a mood disorder or SUD develop comorbidity. Bipolar Disorder (BD) is associated with an especially high rate of comorbid SUDs. An estimated 60% of individuals with BD present with lifetime prevalence of substance abuse. In adolescents/young adults with BD, especially high rates of alcohol, cannabis, and tobacco use are reported with at least 40, 39, and 12% of adolescents/young adults with BD reporting at least weekly use of nicotine, alcohol, or cannabis respectively.
Comorbid SUD in BD is associated with more severe illness outcomes, including increased impulsivity, more severe mood episodes, cognitive deficits, and an increase in the already high risk of suicide attempts. Despite the importance of understanding this comorbidity, there has been a paucity of study on the neural mechanisms underlying its development.
Neuroimaging studies suggest abnormalities in prefrontal cortex (PFC) neural systems are central in BD. These systems subserve emotion and impulse regulation and include ventral, rostral and dorsal PFC regions, as well as PFC projection sites, including insular and temporopolar cortices and amygdala. Evidence also suggests abnormalities in PFC system developmental trajectories in adolescents/young adults with BD. The neural systems believed to be involved in BD have substantial overlap with neural systems implicated in SUDs, suggesting vulnerability for comorbidity may be related to anatomically overlapping brain regions.
Bipolar Disorder and Comorbid Substance Use Disorders
Few neuroimaging studies have examined SUD comorbidity in BD. Adults with BD and comorbid alcohol abuse/dependence compared to adults with BD without SUDs were found to have lower gray matter volume (GMV), functional abnormalities, and glutamatergic system deficits in dorsal PFC. However, tobacco use by these subjects was not reported and could have affected findings as an association of reduced PFC and insula cortical thickness and tobacco use in adults with BD has been reported. In young adults (18–30 years) with BD, oxidative stress in frontotemporal cortices is exacerbated by risky alcohol consumption and tobacco use, but it is unclear how pre-existing differences in frontotemporal cortices may contribute to this effect. To our knowledge, no studies have examined alcohol abuse/dependence or tobacco use during adolescence in BD with a focus on neuroanatomical factors involved in comorbidity development.
A pilot study of adolescents with BD, following subjects over two years, showed lower GMV in temporal cortex in those diagnosed with comorbid cannabis abuse/dependence before or after scan (n=7), compared to adolescents with BD without comorbid diagnoses (n=7). In another study, adolescents/young adults (12–21 years) with BD and comorbid cannabis use disorders (n=25; 7 of whom also had comorbid alcohol abuse/dependence) were observed to have decreases in functional responses of the amygdala, shown to be excessive in adolescents with BD without comorbidity. However, tobacco use was not examined in either of these studies and GMV was not assessed in the latter study. While the identification of altered GMV and functional responses in regions subserving emotional regulation in adolescents with BD and substance comorbidity may indicate regions involved in comorbidity development, the subjects were not studied exclusively prior to the development of comorbidity so a direct effect of drug exposure cannot be ruled out.
Sex Differences in Brain: Bipolar and Substance Use Disorders
It is well established that there are fundamental sex differences in brain, for example extending from in utero fetal hormone programming through subsequent brain structure, function and chemistry. Most brain-based diseases have sex differences in either prevalence, susceptibility, age of onset, presentation, course, prognosis, medication response, treatment outcome, and/or mortality. Sex differences also are reported in addiction processes. For example, in females, greater internalizing symptoms, e.g. depression and anxiety, have been associated with tobacco, alcohol, and cannabis use; while in males, associations with externalizing behaviors, e.g. aggressive actions, and substance use have been found. Sex differences have also been demonstrated in prevalence, risk, and clinical correlates of alcoholism in adults with BD, including greater number of depressive episodes in females. It is unclear what neuroanatomical factors are associated with this sexual dimorphism.
Findings in groups at increased risk for BD and SUDs [e.g. with early life adversity and family history of SUDs ] support sex distinctions in brain regions implicated in BD and in SUDs, e.g. greater abnormalities within ventral regions subserving emotional regulation in females versus dorsal regions subserving impulse control in males. Sex differences in neurochemical abnormalities in the dorsal PFC in adults with BD and comorbid alcohol abuse/dependence have also been found. Specifically, one study suggested that glutamatergic abnormalities in the dorsal PFC are associated with comorbidity in males, but not females; while myo-inositol abnormalities in dorsal PFC are associated with comorbidity in females, but not males. Although research suggests sex-specific mechanisms in the development of SUDs, how sexual dimorphism may contribute to development of SUDs in BD is unknown.
The Purpose of the Current Study
The goal of this preliminary study was to identify regional GMV associated with future development of substance use problems. We assessed relationships between GMV measures on high resolution structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) scans of adolescents with BD who had minimal to no prior alcohol or other substance exposure at baseline, but reported substance use at follow-up on average 6 years later. Specific substances that were reported at follow-up were tobacco, alcohol and cannabis. We also conducted a secondary analysis exploring patterns of regional GMV involvement in females and males. We hypothesized an inverse association between baseline GMV in PFC, insular and temporopolar cortices, and amygdala and severity of future substance use problems, with females showing more associations with future substance use in ventral system components subserving emotional regulation and males in rostral and dorsal system components subserving impulse regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants
Subjects who were assessed and scanned in a cross-sectional study and consented to being re-contacted were re-contacted and recruited if they met inclusion and did not meet exclusion criteria. Participants included 30 adolescents/young adults diagnosed with BD [mean age at baseline + standard deviation (SD)= 16+2 years; 29 (97%) BDI, 1 (3%) BDII; 50% female; mean age at follow-up= 22+3 years] (see Table 1 for participant characterization). The presence/absence of psychiatric diagnoses and mood state at time of neuroimaging were confirmed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Diagnosis for participants ≥18 years and the Kiddie-Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for participants <18 years. At baseline assessment, all participants completed sMRI. At follow-up assessment, on average 6+2 years after baseline assessment, subjects completed the CRAFFT interview to assess alcohol and substance use problems since baseline assessment.
As the aim of this study was to examine baseline GMV as a predictor of future alcohol and substance use problems, subjects were excluded if at baseline they self-reported more than minimal alcohol and/or cannabis exposure or ever having used cocaine, opioids, phencyclidine, hallucinogens, or solvents/inhalants. Sixty-three percent of subjects (11 males, 8 females) reported never trying alcohol or any other illicit substances or having tried a sip of alcohol once at a family gathering. Remaining subjects reported having tried alcohol or cannabis once or on a few occasions with peers. Subjects were not excluded for tobacco use. At baseline and follow-up assessment, tobacco use was assessed as smoking using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND). At baseline, two subjects (7%) reported current smoking and one subject (3%) reported past history of, but not current, smoking. Transition to smoking was studied in remaining subjects. In addition to the 3 subjects with a history of smoking tobacco at baseline, 11 individuals (41%; 7 females) with no tobacco use at baseline reported history of smoking at follow-up (8 were currently smoking at follow-up assessment; 4 female current smokers at follow-up). Sixteen individuals (53%; 6 females) reported no history of smoking tobacco at either time point.
On the neuroimaging day, urine toxicology screens for substances of abuse (cannabis, cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, methadone, opiates, phencyclidine, barbiturates, and benzodiazepines) were negative for all subjects. Exclusion criteria included history of neurological illness, including head trauma with loss of consciousness for ≥5min, or major medical illness. Subjects were not excluded for comorbidities or family history of psychiatric disorders as there are high rates of these in individuals with BD and excluding decreases generalizability. After complete description of the study, written informed consent was obtained from subjects ≥18 years, and assent and parent/guardian permission from subjects <18, in accordance with the Yale School of Medicine human investigation committee.
MRI Acquisition and Processing
High-resolution sMRI data were acquired for each subject with a 3-Tesla Siemens Trio MR scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). The sMRI sagittal images were acquired with a three-dimensional magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) T1-weighted sequence with parameters: repetition time (TR)=1500ms, echo time (TE)=2.83ms, matrix 256 × 256, field of view (FOV)=256mm x 256mm2, and 160 one-mm slices without gap and two averages. Images were processed with the DARTEL toolbox within Statistical and Parametric Mapping 12 (SPM12) (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The SPM segmentation function and SPM tissue probability maps for gray matter, white matter and cerebral spinal fluid were implemented for bias correction and segmentation and used to create DARTEL templates using the “Run Dartel (create Templates)” command under DARTEL tools. Data were normalized to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space and smoothed with an 8mm full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) isotropic kernel.
Alcohol and Substance Use
Subjects were administered the CRAFFT interview, which consists of 6 yes/no questions inquiring about risk indicators or problems experienced from alcohol or drug use. CRAFFT is an acronym with each letter representing one of 6 items. C relates to history of driving or riding in a Car driven by someone who had been using alcohol/drugs, R if used alcohol/drugs to Relax, A if used alcohol/drugs while Alone, F if Forgotten things one did while using alcohol/drugs, F whether told by Family/Friends to cut down on alcohol/drug use, and T whether gotten into Trouble while using alcohol/drugs. The questions are equally weighted (one point for each yes answer). The CRAFFT has substantial empirical support as a substance use screening instrument for adolescents in multiple settings, including outpatient general medical and inpatient psychiatric settings. A score of ≥2 has been used as the threshold optimal for identifying alcohol/substance problems. At follow-up, 19 (63%) participants had a CRAFFT score of ≥2 (CRAFFTmean+SD= 2.3+2.1; scores ranged from 0–6 and showed a normal distribution in both males and females).
Additional Assessments
Participants were assessed with the Young Mania Rating Scale and the 2-subtest version (Matrix Reasoning and Vocabulary) of the Weschler Abbreviated Scales of Intelligence. Additionally, at baseline assessment, 27 participants [14 female (51%)] completed the Child Depression Rating Scale (CDRS) and 25 participants [12 female (48%)] the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS)-11 or BIS-11a. The BIS is a self-reported measure of trait impulsivity. The total BIS score is the sum of three subscale scores: non-planning impulsivity, cognitive-attentional impulsivity, and motor impulsivity. BIS-11a scores were prorated to BIS-11 scores as previously described.
Statistical Analyses
Demographic and Clinical Feature Analysis
Subjects were categorized into those scoring at high (>2: CRAFFTHIGH) versus low (<2: CRAFFTLOW) risk for alcohol and substance use problems. Independent t-tests were performed to assess group differences in age at baseline scans, age at follow-up, interval between baseline scan and follow-up, and baseline IQ, years of education, Young Mania Rating Scale, CDRS and BIS (total and subscale) scores. Chi-square (or Fisher’s exact) tests were used to examine whether clinical factors differed by CRAFFT group at baseline (see Table 2 and Table 3). These included mood state (euthymic, depressed, elevated), history (yes/no) of hospitalization, rapid cycling, psychosis, suicide attempt, smoking tobacco, comorbid diagnosis (yes/no) of simple/specific phobia, ADHD, ODD, CD, or separation anxiety, and medication subclasses (on/off). Analyses were repeated stratified by sex. Additionally, a Chi-square test was used to assess if the number of individuals transitioning to smoking tobacco between baseline and follow-up assessment differed by CRAFFT group (excluding 3 individuals with baseline history of tobacco use). A Fisher’s exact test was used to assess whether CRAFFTHIGH males and females differed in the number of individuals who transitioned to smoking tobacco between baseline and follow-up assessment. Results were considered significant at p<0.05.
SPM Voxel-Based Analysis
A two-sample t-test was conducted in SPM12 to assess CRAFFTHIGH versus CRAFFTLOW group differences in baseline GMV, including data from all subjects. For hypothesized regions, PFC, insular and temporopolar cortices and amygdala, results were considered significant at p<0.005 (uncorrected) and clusters >20 voxels. This threshold was chosen to balance for type I and type II errors in preliminary studies. For remaining brain regions, findings were considered as significant with p<0.05 Family-Wise Error (FWE)-corrected and a threshold of 10 voxels for multiple comparisons. Mean GMV, extracted from clusters showing significant differences between CRAFFT groups, were calculated. Post hoc analysis was performed to assess effect of CRAFFT group when covarying age or IQ at baseline, with GMV from extracted clusters as the dependent variables. To further confirm regional GMV association with CRAFFT outcome, the relationship between mean GMV in significant clusters with total CRAFFT score was assessed with Pearson correlations across all subjects. Correlations were repeated stratified by sex to explore sex-related patterns in volumetric features associated with the development of substance use problems. Correlation analyses were also performed across all subjects, and stratified by sex, to assess relationship between GMV and baseline CDRS or BIS (total and subscale) scores. Based on our a priori hypotheses, GMV from clusters within rostral PFC (rPFC) and dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC) showing a significant difference between CRAFFT groups were assessed for relationship with BIS (total and subscales) scores; GMV from clusters within orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and insular and temporopolar cortices were assessed for relationship with baseline CDRS scores. Post hoc analyses above were repeated after removing 3 subjects with a history of tobacco use at baseline.
A t-test was used to explore differences in extracted GMV, from significant regions identified in the CRAFFT group analysis above, between individuals who never smoked tobacco at either assessment (N=16) and those who transitioned to smoking tobacco between baseline and follow-up assessment (N=11). Regional GMV identified as being associated with transitioning to smoking tobacco were explored across all subjects who transitioned and were currently smoking tobacco at follow-up using Pearson correlations to determine relationships with total FTND scores.
We performed t-tests to explore associations between mean GMV in significant clusters with clinical and medication subclass factors present and absent at baseline in N>5 subjects, including mood state (euthymic versus elevated), history (yes/no) of hospitalizations, rapid cycling, lifetime psychosis, and if taking (off/on) an antipsychotic, anticonvulsant, stimulant, lithium, antidepressant, or benzodiazepine. Analyses were repeated stratified by sex for clinical factors present or absent at baseline in N>5 female or male subjects, including history (yes/no) at baseline of rapid cycling, lifetime psychosis, and if taking (off/on) an antipsychotic at baseline. In females, we assessed effects of taking an anticonvulsant and differences between subjects transitioning to smoking tobacco between baseline and follow-up assessments (N=7 females), compared to those reporting no history of smoking at either assessment (N=6 females). In males, we assessed effects of comorbid ADHD and taking a stimulant or lithium at baseline assessment, but did not assess for smoking conversion as only 4 males converted. These post hoc analyses were considered significant at p<0.05. All significant results are reported below.
RESULTS
Differences in Baseline Demographic and Clinical Features Between CRAFFT Follow-up Groups
In baseline analyses across all subjects, the CRAFFTHIGH group had higher CDRS scores (t25=2.11, p=0.045). Within females, the CRAFFTHIGH group had a trend towards higher CDRS scores (t13=2.14, p=0.054). No significant differences in BIS (total or subscales) scores were observed (see Table 3 for summary of CDRS and BIS scores). More CRAFFTHIGH males, compared to CRAFFTLOW males, had comorbid diagnoses of ADHD (78% versus 17% respectively, p = 0.04, Fisher’s exact test) and were taking a stimulant at baseline (78% versus 17% respectively, p = 0.04, Fisher’s exact test). Overall, the CRAFFTHIGH group had more individuals transition to smoking tobacco at follow-up assessment (56% versus 18% respectively, χ2=3.9, df=1, p=0.048). There was no difference between CRAFFTHIGH females and males in number of individuals who transitioned to smoking tobacco between baseline and follow-up assessment (63% CRAFFTHIGH females versus 50% CRAFFTHIGH males respectively, χ2=0.25, df=1, p=0.61). There were no other differences in demographic/clinical factors between CRAFFT groups overall or within females or males (see Table 2).
Differences in Baseline GMV Between CRAFFT Follow-up Groups
Within our a priori hypothesized regions, the CRAFFTHIGH group had lower GMV in left OFC [Brodmann area (BA) 11, MNI coordinates: x=−18mm, y=27mm, z=−20mm, cluster=45 voxels], right rPFC (BA10, x=18mm, y=60mm, z=3mm, cluster=35 voxels), left dlPFC (BA9, x=−28mm, y=27mm, z=38mm, cluster=79 voxels), and right insular (x=44mm, y=−8mm, z=−2mm, cluster= 175 voxels) and left temporopolar cortices (BA38, x=−48mm, y=20mm, z=−26mm, cluster=164 voxels) (Figure 1). The CRAFFTHIGH group did not show any areas of greater GMV in hypothesized regions. No significant differences in GMV were observed outside of hypothesized regions.
Significance remained in hypothesized regions when covarying age or when covarying IQ. Across all subjects, total CRAFFT scores were negatively correlated with extracted mean GMV of clusters within the OFC (r=−0.44, n=30, p=0.016), rPFC (r=−0.51, n=30, p=0.004), dlPFC (r=−0.63, n=30, p=0.0002), and insula (r=−0.45, n=30, p=0.013). Insula GMV was negatively correlated with baseline CDRS scores (r=−0.46, n=27, p=0.015). Both females and males showed a negative correlation between total CRAFFT scores and dlPFC GMV (females: r=−0.69, n=15, p=0.004; males: r=−0.67, n=15, p=0.008). Additionally, females, but not males, showed a negative correlation between total CRAFFT scores and OFC (r=−0.74, n=15, p=0.002) and insula (r=−0.69, n=15, p=0.004) GMV. Males, but not females, showed a negative correlation between total CRAFFT scores and rPFC GMV (r=−0.62, n=15, p=0.01). Within females, a trend for a negative correlation between insula GMV and baseline CDRS scores (r=−0.50, n=14, p=0.07) was observed. When excluding the 3 subjects with baseline history of tobacco these results were still observed (not shown).
Lower GMV within the OFC (t25=2.98, p=0.006) and insular (t25=2.46, p=0.021) and temporopolar (t25=2.54, p=0.018) cortices was observed in individuals who transitioned to smoking tobacco between baseline and follow-up assessment, compared to individuals who reported no history of smoking tobacco at either assessment. Temporopolar GMV was negatively associated with follow-up FTND scores (r=−0.76, n=8, p=0.03) in individuals who transitioned to smoking tobacco after their baseline assessment and were currently smoking at follow-up. No other significant effects of clinical factors were observed on GMV when looking across all subjects or when investigating within females and males separately.
DISCUSSION
Lower baseline GMV in the PFC, including dlPFC, OFC, and rPFC, and insular and temporopolar cortices, were observed among adolescents with BD who subsequently reported substance use problems with alcohol and cannabis on the CRAFFT interview compared to adolescents with BD who did not. Exploratory analyses supported both common and different patterns of regional GMV associated with substance use development among females and males. Decreased baseline dlPFC GMV was associated with substance use problems in both females and males. Lower baseline OFC and insula GMV was associated with substance use problems in females; lower baseline rPFC GMV was associated with substance use problems in males. Greater depressive symptoms at baseline were associated with greater substance use problems at follow-up, with depressive symptoms related to lower insula GMV, with these associations driven by the female data. Additionally, lower OFC, insular and temporopolar GMV were observed in individuals who transitioned to smoking tobacco, with temporopolar GMV inversely associated with severity of nicotine dependence at follow-up.
Regions in which GMV abnormalities were associated with development of substance use problems in BD are consistent with previous findings in adolescents in the absence of BD with alcohol and substance abuse/dependence, and drug-related processes, including craving, motivational changes, withdrawal symptoms, and relapse/ treatment outcomes. Abnormalities in behaviors subserved by these regions may contribute to vulnerability/risk for substance use problems. Dorsal system components, i.e. the dlPFC and rPFC, are associated with higher order executive functions and behavioral control. Ventral and paralimbic cortical regions implicated, i.e. OFC, insular and temporopolar cortices, are associated with affective processing and regulation, self-awareness, stimulus-reinforcement associations, behavioral control and risky decision making.
Circuitry Associated with Sex-Related Risk for Substance Problems
Exploratory findings in regions subserving affective and internal monitoring processes in females are consistent with literature supporting associations between disturbances in affective processing and internalizing symptoms and substance use problems. This has been found in the absence of BD and suggested to be especially salient in the development of substance use problems in females. The insula has been associated with addictive behavior, postulated to be through involvement in interoceptive aspects of drug craving and seeking. The right posterior insula is suggested to be involved in self-awareness and emergence of a sense of self. Decreased awareness/insight are implicated in addicted individuals failing to seek treatment. Differences in insula development and related differences in development of awareness/insight during adolescence may contribute to an inability to recognize and relate negative consequences to early drug use increasing the risk for problematic usage. Depression, a risk factor for substance use especially in females, is associated with differences in awareness/insight. An inverse association between insula GMV and number of depressive episodes in BD has been reported. We report associations between greater depression symptomatology, lower insula GMV, and greater substance use problems at follow-up, largely due to data from females. More research is needed in adolescents on the relationships between the insula, depression, constructs of awareness/insight and the development of substance-use related problems, especially in females.
Literature also supports associations between externalizing symptoms and substance use problems. This has been found in the absence of BD and suggested to be especially salient in the development of substance use problems in males. Impulsiveness has been suggested as a trait feature of BD that might increase vulnerability for substance use problems. We did not detect associations between BIS impulsivity scores and subsequent substance use problems. It is possible this is due to limited power to detect associations particularly in the small male subsample, or that differences in impulsiveness may not have emerged yet in this young sample and future studies examining behavioral trajectories associated with transitioning to substance use disorders may reveal differences. It is also possible that the BIS does not capture relevant impulsivity constructs. This is supported by work showing risk-taking and novelty seeking may distinguish adults with BD and comorbid SUDs better than BIS impulsiveness scores.
More males with BD and prospective substance use problems were diagnosed with comorbid ADHD at baseline. Recent work suggests ADHD may increase risk for substance use problems in the absence of BD and when comorbid with BD. The neuroanatomical factors underlying this association are unclear. Adults with BD and comorbid ADHD, compared to those without, showed greater rPFC dysfunction. While an association between comorbid ADHD and GMV findings were not detected in this study possibly owing to sample size, males but not females did show an inverse association between rPFC GMV and CRAFFT scores. More work is needed to identify if behavioral constructs associated with rPFC, e.g. executive functions, decision making and response processes, may be particularly salient in development of substance use problems in males with BD.
Regions of GMV differences reported here are associated with hot and cold cognition. Adults with BD perform worse on hot and cold cognitive tasks compared to healthy controls. Studies suggest females may initiate substance use later than males and it is suggested that hot cognition develops more slowly than cold cognition. In light that we report regions associated with hot cognition are predictive in females, while regions associated with cold cognition predictive in males, differences in speed of hot and cold cognitive development may be associated with sex differences in age of risk for substance use initiation. More work is needed to understand sex differences in the development of these processes during adolescence and if these are disrupted in BD.
Lower baseline OFC, insular and temporopolar GMV in adolescents with BD were also associated with transitioning to smoking tobacco. As above, these regions are involved in affective processes, including depression symptomatology. Findings in these regions are consistent with literature supporting associations between depression and tobacco use in the absence of BD. It has been suggested that this relationship is especially salient for tobacco use in females. We did not observe sex-related associations between GMV in these regions and transitioning to smoking tobacco; however, ability to detect associations was limited by sample size. While we did not detect an association between temporopolar GMV and follow-up CRAFFT scores, temporopolar GMV was inversely related to follow-up Fagerstrom scores for nicotine dependence severity suggesting its involvement in development of smoking. Future work is warranted to investigate neuroanatomical specificity for vulnerability/risk for certain drugs types in BD.
Neuroanatomical Factors Associated with Substance Use Problems in Other Populations
Studies of adolescents recruited from school systems, the majority of whom had no history of psychopathology at baseline, report lower dorsal PFC and OFC GMV and less OFC gyrification associated with subsequent alcohol-related problems and initiation of cannabis use. Functional MRI studies of adolescents having no history of psychopathology but genetic risk for substance use problems have shown associations between regional responses during response inhibition or working memory tasks in dorsal PFC, including dlPFC and rPFC, with subsequent substance use problems. We are not aware of a study examining adolescents with minimal to no alcohol or substance use at baseline demonstrating associations between baseline insular and temporopolar GMV with prospective substance use problems. As above, a growing body of work suggests insula involvement in drug craving and seeking behavior. One report did show young adults with moderate alcohol use who then transitioned to heavy alcohol use had greater alcohol cue reactivity in the insula. However, as that study consisted of individuals with moderate alcohol use at baseline, brain effects of alcohol exposure cannot be ruled out.
We did not observe an association between amygdala GMV and subsequent substance use problems in BD. In previous studies examining adolescents who predominantly had no history of psychopathology, associations between amygdala volumes with prospective alcohol/cannabis use were also not detected. This suggests that previous observations of amygdala abnormalities as observed in adolescents/young adults without BD but with cannabis or alcohol use as well as in adolescents with BD and comorbid cannabis use may be related to substance exposure. Additionally, altered amygdala morphology and function in association with substance use has shown genetic and sex-related associations. It is therefore possible that genetic heterogeneity and limited power to detect sex-related associations may have confounded ability to detect findings.
To our knowledge, there have not been other reports demonstrating neuroanatomical predictors of subsequent transitions to smoking tobacco. Adolescents/young adult tobacco smokers without BD, compared to non-smokers, show cortical thinning in the OFC and a negative association between OFC and insula cortical thickness and magnitude of lifetime exposure to tobacco smoke. Further study on OFC, insular and temporopolar cortices involvement in elevating risk for smoking tobacco is warranted.
Limitations and Future Directions
The size and heterogeneous clinical features of the subject sample in this preliminary study could have limited power to detect associations with substance use. Future studies with larger sample sizes and greater power to identify sex-related circuitry while also systematically assessing clinical factors are needed. We did not assess medication adherence at follow-up which could contribute to risk. A strength of the present study is the minimal to no alcohol, cannabis, tobacco and other substance use at baseline; findings of lower GMV associated with prospective substance use problems are therefore unlikely to be due to brain effects of alcohol or other drug exposure. Although the toxicology screens aided determination of recent use, self-reports by subjects could have minimized substance use at baseline. Drug use at follow-up was not assessed by structured interview and subjects could have under reported baseline drug use. We were not able to explore factors associated specifically with alcohol, cannabis or tobacco use as 89% of individuals meeting CRAFFT threshold at follow-up reported use of more than one of these substances. Type I errors are possible given the preliminary nature of this study; we reported p-values uncorrected for multiple comparisons to minimize type II errors. Future studies are needed to confirm the current findings, including exploratory findings suggesting sex-related circuitry associated with risk, with sufficient power to detect regional differences in non-hypothesized regions and effects of clinical features on risk.
Large scale imaging studies, incorporating permission into consent forms for future re-contact for phone interviews to assess symptomatology, could provide invaluable insight regarding risk factors and development that builds upon already funded research. Research incorporating longitudinal study—examining effects of genetic variations and behavioral constructs, and functional consequences of structural differences identified here—is warranted, including study to disentangle contributions of regions, and interactions between them contributing to development of substance use problems. Functions investigated should include emotional processing and regulation, in addition to executive functions, as these functions may be differently associated with substance use development in females and males. Similar regions of reduced gray matter have been found to be a characteristic that crosses diagnostic boundaries. More work is needed investigating sexual dimorphism in mechanisms driving drug-seeking behavior and transitions to substance use problems in females and males with BD, including environmental/societal influences, and commonalities and distinctions between BD and other psychiatric disorders. The current study did not include an at risk comparison group so diagnostic-associated neuroanatomical factors associated with risk cannot be determined. Future studies focused on mechanisms underlying variation in GMV, and associated outcomes, in BD are needed. The glutamatergic system is involved in adolescent brain maturation and abnormalities within this system are implicated in addiction and pediatric BD. Other factors that could contribute to altered GMV in BD include, but are not limited to, abnormalities in the serotonergic system and/or sex hormones. For example, rodent studies suggest estrogen in females can reduce neuron density in ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Studies examining resilience to developing substance use in psychiatric disorders and at risk populations could reveal novel therapeutic strategies. It is important to note that reduced volume found to be associated with future substance use could be an epiphenomenon of more severe BD symptomatology. Future work is needed to clarify if regions identified here are addiction-specific outside of worse bipolar symptomatology that may elevate risk for substance use.
In Conclusion
This study provides new preliminary evidence that GMV in brain regions with known roles in addiction are involved in risk for developing substance use problems in adolescents with BD. Work reported here in adolescents with BD, taken together with work examining predictors of future substance use in other non-psychiatric samples, suggests PFC abnormalities may be common to risk for developing substance use problems in females and males. Our preliminary findings suggest there may also be sex-related differences in the paths to developing substance use problems in BD with involvement of regions subserving emotional processes, such as the OFC and insula, in females, and regions subserving executive functioning or response processes, such as the rPFC, in males. Future work confirming underlying sex-specific mechanisms could improve detection of individuals at risk and intervention strategies.
           CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT         
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
Neurobiologic processes in drug reward and addiction
Impulsivity, neural deficits, and the addictions: the “oops” factor in relapse
Comorbid ADHD is associated with altered patterns of neuronal activation in adolescents with bipolar disorder performing a simple attention task
Neurobiological circuits regulating attention, cognitive control, motivation, and emotion: disruptions in neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders
Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex
Major depressive disorder is associated with abnormal interoceptive activity and functional connectivity in the insula
Addiction motivation reformulated: an affective processing model of negative reinforcement
Inhibition and impulsivity: behavioral and neural basis of response control
Does a history of substance abuse and illness chronicity predict increased impulsivity in bipolar disorder?
Adolescent brain development and the risk for alcohol and other drug problems
Sex differences in drug abuse
Sex Differences in Animal Models: Focus on Addiction
The impact of adolescent binge drinking and sustained abstinence on affective state
Gray matter volume abnormalities and externalizing symptoms in subjects at high risk for alcohol dependence
Childhood and current ADHD symptom dimensions are associated with more severe cannabis outcomes in college students
Neurofunctional changes in adolescent cannabis users with and without bipolar disorder
Functional neuroanatomy of bipolar disorder: structure, function, and connectivity in an amygdala-anterior paralimbic neural system
Significance of adolescent neurodevelopment for the neural circuitry of bipolar disorder
Alcohol and depression
Genetic and early environmental influences on the serotonin system: consequences for brain development and risk for psychopathology
Adolescent brain maturation, the endogenous cannabinoid system and the neurobiology of cannabis-induced schizophrenia
Gender differences in substance use disorders
The gateway hypothesis of rostral prefrontal cortex (area 10) function
A risk variant for alcoholism in the NMDA receptor affects amygdala activity during fear conditioning in humans
Substance abuse in bipolar disorder
Sex difference in alcoholism: who is at a greater risk for development of alcoholic complication?
Affective behavior and temperament predict the onset of smoking in adolescence
Volumetric differences in the anterior cingulate cortex prospectively predict alcohol-related problems in adolescence
Orbitofrontal volumes in early adolescence predict initiation of cannabis use: a 4-year longitudinal and prospective study
Risky alcohol use in young persons with emerging bipolar disorder is associated with increased oxidative stress
The impact of alcohol and tobacco use on in vivo glutathione in youth with bipolar disorder: an exploratory study
Orbitofrontal cortex and neuromaturation: a gateway to risk?
Differential effects of insular and ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions on risky decision-making
Neural mechanisms of risk taking and relationships with hazardous drinking
Evolving knowledge of sex differences in brain structure, function, and chemistry
How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body
Adolescents’ Neural Processing of Risky Decisions: Effects of Sex and Behavioral Disinhibition
Validity of the CRAFFT in American-Indian and Alaska-Native adolescents: screening for drug and alcohol risk
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) response to alcohol pictures predicts subsequent transition to heavy drinking in college students
Influence of alcohol use and family history of alcoholism on neural response to alcohol cues in college drinkers
Suicide risk in bipolar patients: the role of co-morbid substance use disorders
Familial rates of affective and substance use disorders in patients with first-episode mania
Neural correlates of impulsivity in healthy males and females with family histories of alcoholism
A review of the psychometric properties of the CRAFFT instrument: 1999–2010
Development of rostral prefrontal cortex and cognitive and behavioural disorders
Corticostriatal-limbic gray matter morphology in adolescents with self-reported exposure to childhood maltreatment
Depressive symptoms by self-report in adolescence: phase I of the development of a questionnaire for depression by self-report
Nicotine use as a possible risk factor for subcortical abnormalities
Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex
Modulating the experience of agency: a positron emission tomography study
Sex differences in drug addiction: a review of animal and human studies
The role of orbitofrontal cortex in decision making: a component process account

Improved assessment of significant activation in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): use of a cluster-size threshold
Gender differences in prevalence, risk, and clinical correlates of alcoholism comorbidity in bipolar disorder
Attention to pleasant stimuli in early adolescence predicts alcohol-related problems in mid-adolescence
Basal ganglia plus insula damage yields stronger disruption of smoking addiction than basal ganglia damage alone
Impulsivity in Adolescent Bipolar Disorder
Functional specialization within rostral prefrontal cortex (area 10): a meta-analysis
Cannabis use is quantitatively associated with nucleus accumbens and amygdala abnormalities in young adult recreational users
Dynamic mapping of cortical development before and after the onset of pediatric bipolar illness
Bipolar disorder with comorbid substance abuse: diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment
Fetal hormonal programming of sex differences in depression: linking women’s mental health with sex differences in the brain across the lifespan
The neurocircuitry of impaired insight in drug addiction
Dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex in addiction: neuroimaging findings and clinical implications
Identification of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness
Discriminative validity of a parent version of the Young Mania Rating Scale
Tobacco and psychiatric dual disorders
Cannabis use and development of externalizing and internalizing behaviour problems in early adolescence: A TRAILS study
The relationship of personality traits to substance abuse in patients with bipolar disorder
Prefrontal cortical and striatal activity to happy and fear faces in bipolar disorder is associated with comorbid substance abuse and eating disorder
The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire
Cigarette smoking and impulsivity in bipolar disorder
The co-occurrence of cigarette smoking and bipolar disorder: phenomenology and treatment considerations
Left middle frontal gyrus response to inhibitory errors in children prospectively predicts early problem substance use
Degradation of cognitive timing mechanisms in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia
Frequent alcohol, nicotine or cannabis use is common in young persons presenting for mental healthcare: a cross-sectional study
Conduct problem trajectories and alcohol use and misuse in mid to late adolescence
Right amygdala volume in adolescent and young adult offspring from families at high risk for developing alcoholism
Amygdala Volume in Offspring from Multiplex for Alcohol Dependence Families: The Moderating Influence of Childhood Environment and 5-HTTLPR Variation
Gender differences in drinking: why do they still exist?
Toward dysfunctional connectivity: a review of neuroimaging findings in pediatric major depressive disorder
Gender differences in the comorbidity of smoking behavior and major depression
An internalizing pathway to alcohol use and disorder
The National Academies Collection: Reports funded by National Institutes of Health
Neuroanatomic comparison of bipolar adolescents with and without cannabis use disorders
Cigarette smoking is associated with thinner cingulate and insular cortices in patients with severe mental illness
The cellular basis for volume changes in the rat cortex during puberty: white and gray matter
Preliminary evidence for progressive prefrontal abnormalities in adolescents and young adults with bipolar disorder
Smoking, stress, and negative affect: correlation, causation, and context across stages of smoking
Conceptualizing impulsivity and risk taking in bipolar disorder: importance of history of alcohol abuse
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children-Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL): initial reliability and validity data
Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States. Results from the National Comorbidity Survey
Validity of brief alcohol screening tests among adolescents: a comparison of the AUDIT, POSIT, CAGE, and CRAFFT
Validity of the CRAFFT substance abuse screening test among adolescent clinic patients
A new brief screen for adolescent substance abuse
Anterior prefrontal function and the limits of human decision-making
Adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptom profiles and concurrent problems with alcohol and cannabis: sex differences in a representative, population survey
Neurocircuitry of addiction
The functional neuroanatomy of the human orbitofrontal cortex: evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychology
Psychiatric and medical comorbidities of bipolar disorder
Emergence of sex differences in the development of substance use and abuse during adolescence
From mother to child: orbitofrontal cortex gyrification and changes of drinking behaviour during adolescence
Neurocognitive impairment in patients with co-occurring bipolar disorder and alcohol dependence upon discharge from inpatient care
Segregation of working memory functions within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
Cannabis and psychiatric disorders: it is not only addiction
Inhibitory control and emotional stress regulation: neuroimaging evidence for frontal-limbic dysfunction in psycho-stimulant addiction
Reduced frontal cortical thickness and increased caudate volume within fronto-striatal circuits in young adult smokers
Type I and Type II error concerns in fMRI research: re-balancing the scale
Accurate automatic estimation of total intracranial volume: a nuisance variable with less nuisance
Decision-making processes following damage to the prefrontal cortex
Neuron number decreases in the rat ventral, but not dorsal, medial prefrontal cortex between adolescence and adulthood
Greater executive and visual memory dysfunction in comorbid bipolar disorder and substance use disorder
Attachment and depression differentially influence nicotine dependence among male and female undergraduates: a preliminary study
Gender effects on amygdala morphometry in adolescent marijuana users
Longitudinal associations between childhood and adulthood externalizing and internalizing psychopathology and adolescent substance use
Activation of anterior insula during self-reflection
Reductions in cannabis use are associated with mood improvement in female emerging adults
Cigarette exposure, dependence, and craving are related to insula thickness in young adult smokers
Brain structure correlates of emotion-based rash impulsivity
Anterior Cortical Development During Adolescence in Bipolar Disorder
The insula: a critical neural substrate for craving and drug seeking under conflict and risk
Damage to the insula disrupts addiction to cigarette smoking
Trait impulsivity is increased in bipolar disorder patients with comorbid alcohol use disorders
Association between prior alcohol use disorders and decreased prefrontal gray matter volumes in bipolar I disorder patients
Bipolar disorder comorbid with alcoholism: a 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy study
Correlates of 1-year prospective outcome in bipolar disorder: results from the Stanley Foundation Bipolar Network
Neural activation during inhibition predicts initiation of substance use in adolescence
CRAFFT as a Substance Use Screening Instrument for Adolescent Psychiatry Admissions
Developmental pathways to adolescent cannabis abuse and dependence: child maltreatment, emerging personality, and internalizing versus externalizing psychopathology
Craving is associated with amygdala volumes in adolescent marijuana users during abstinence
Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale
Psychological changes and cognitive impairments in adolescent heavy drinkers
Comorbidity between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and bipolar disorder in a specialized mood disorders outpatient clinic
Efferent association pathways from the rostral prefrontal cortex in the macaque monkey
Self-development: integrating cognitive, socioemotional, and neuroimaging perspectives
Screening instruments for substance use and brief interventions targeting adolescents in primary care: a literature review
Metabotropic glutamatergic receptors and their ligands in drug addiction
Development of hot and cool executive function during the transition to adolescence

Anterior prefrontal cortex: insights into function from anatomy and neuroimaging
From child maltreatment to adolescent cannabis abuse and dependence: a developmental cascade model
Hot and cold cognition in unmedicated depressed subjects with bipolar disorder
The functions of the orbitofrontal cortex
The relationship between childhood depressive symptoms and problem alcohol use in early adolescence: findings from a large longitudinal population-based study
Depression, suicidal behavior and insight in adolescents with schizophrenia
False positives in neuroimaging genetics using voxel-based morphometry data
Imaging stress- and cue-induced drug and alcohol craving: association with relapse and clinical implications
Glutamatergic dysregulation in pediatric psychiatric disorders: a systematic review of the magnetic resonance spectroscopy literature
Brain response to working memory over three years of adolescence: influence of initiating heavy drinking
Continuity, psychosocial correlates, and outcome of problematic substance use from adolescence to young adulthood in a community sample
The functional neuroanatomy of bipolar disorder: a consensus model
The co-occurrence of bipolar and substance use disorders
Effects of co-occurring cannabis use disorders on the course of bipolar disorder after a first hospitalization for mania
Neurocircuitry in alcoholism: a substrate of disruption and repair
Impulsivity: a link between bipolar disorder and substance abuse
Increased impulsivity associated with severity of suicide attempt history in patients with bipolar disorder
Impulsivity: differential relationship to depression and mania in bipolar disorder
Insular cortex volume in established bipolar affective disorder: a preliminary MRI study
Prospective study of the association between abandoned dwellings and testosterone level on the development of behaviors leading to cannabis use disorder in boys
Linking ADHD, impulsivity, and drug abuse: a neuropsychological perspective
Adolescent risky decision-making: neurocognitive development of reward and control regions
Targeting the noradrenergic system for gender-sensitive medication development for tobacco dependence
Olfactocentric paralimbic cortex morphology in adolescents with bipolar disorder
Gender differences in associations between lifetime alcohol, depression, panic disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder and tobacco withdrawal
Two decades of smoking cessation treatment research on smokers with depression: 1990–2010
The relationship of major depressive disorder and gender to changes in smoking for current and former smokers: longitudinal evaluation in the US population
The relationship of dysthymia, minor depression, and gender to changes in smoking for current and former smokers: longitudinal evaluation in the U.S. population
A longitudinal examination of adolescent response inhibition: neural differences before and after the initiation of heavy drinking
GABA in the insula - a predictor of the neural response to interoceptive awareness
Neural activity during interoceptive awareness and its associations with alexithymia-An fMRI study in major depressive disorder and non-psychiatric controls
The impact of prior risk experiences on subsequent risky decision-making: the role of the insula
A rating scale for mania: reliability, validity and sensitivity
Hot and cool executive function in childhood and adolescence: development and plasticity
Gray Matter Volume Decreases in Bipolar Disorder with Prospective Substance use Problems
The images show the regions of gray matter volume decreases in the bipolar disorder (BD) group with prospective substance use problems (CRAFFTHIGH), compared to the group with bipolar disorder without prospective substance use problems (CRAFFTLOW). No regions of gray matter volume increases were observed in the BD CRAFFTHIGH group compared to BD CRAFFTLOW group. Significance threshold is p<0.005, cluster >20 voxels. ‘L’ on left of figure denotes left side of brain. The color bar represents the range of T values. BD CRAFFTHIGH N=19, BD CRAFFTLOW N=11.
Demographic and Clinical Characterization of Participants
		ParticipantCharacteristics	 	Demographics/ Clinical Factors	N	30	 	Age (SD) in years	16 (2)	 	Number Female (%)	15 (50%)	 	IQ (SD)	101.5 (16.6)	 	Years of Education (SD)	10.1 (1.9)	 	Young Mania Rating Scale (SD)	2.7 (3.4)	 	Mood State [Euthymic(%) / Depressed(%) / Elevated1(%)]	22 (73%) / 2 (7%) / 6 (20%)	 	Prior Hospitalizations (%)	20 (67%)	 	Rapid Cycling (%)2	11 (37%)	 	Lifetime Psychosis (%)	16 (53%)	 	Suicide Attempt (%)	4 (13%)	 	Cigarette/Tobacco Use History at Baseline (%)	3 (10%)	 	Comorbidities	Simple/ Specific Phobia (%)	3 (10%)	 	Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder3	10 (33%)	 	Oppositional Defiant Disorder3	3 (10%)	 	Conduct Disorder3	1 (3%)	 	Separation Anxiety3	1 (3%)	 	Medications	Medicated at scan (%)	27 (90%)	 	  Antipsychotic (%)	18 (58%)	 	  Anticonvulsant (%)	11 (37%)	 	  Stimulant (%)	10 (32%)	 	  Lithium (%)	9 (30%)	 	  Antidepressant (%)	5 (16%)	 	  Benzodiazepine (%)	5 (16%)	 	  Ketamine (%)	1 (3%)	 	  Adrenergic Agonist (%)	1 (3%)	 	  Amantadine (%)	1 (3%)	 	  Levothyroxine (%)4	4 (13%)	 	
Elevated mood includes subjects in hypomanic, manic, and mixed mood states.
Rapid-cycling reported is lifetime history of rapid cycling.
Presence of disorders of childhood were assessed by structured interview in subjects <18 years; percentage is based on the overall sample.
Individuals on levothyroxine had hypothyroidism.
Differences in Baseline Demographic and Clinical Characterization Between CRAFFT Follow-up Groups
		All Subjects	Male Subjects	Female Subjects	 			CRAFFTLOW(N=11)	CRAFFTHIGH(N=19)	p value	CRAFFTLOW(N=6)	CRAFFTHIGH(N=9)	p value	CRAFFTLOW(N=5)	CRAFFTHIGH(N=10)	p value	 	Demographics/ Clinical Factors	Age at Baseline Scan (SD)	17.1 (2.4)	16.1 (1.6)	0.199	17.5 (2.8)	16.0 (1.4)	0.204	16.6 (2.1)	16.2 (1.9)	0.691	 	Age at Follow-up (SD)	23.5 (4.3)	22.1 (2.2)	0.226	23.8 (4.4)	23.1 (2.1)	0.656	23.2 (4.6)	21.2 (1.9)	0.251	 	Interval Between Scan andFollow-up (SD)	6.5 (2.3)	6.0 (1.9)	0.560	6.4 (2.3)	7.0 (1.3)	0.561	6.6 (2.5)	5.0 (1.8)	0.197	 	IQ (SD)	96.3 (22.3)	104.6 (11.9)	0.189	91.2 (22.1)	101.9 (11.3)	0.235	102.4 (23.4)	107.1 (12.5)	0.615	 	Years of Education (SD)	11.0 (2.5)	9.7 (1.2)	0.068	11.3 (2.8)	9.4 (1.2)	0.111	10.6 (2.4)	9.9 (1.2)	0.433	 	Young Mania Rating Scale(SD)	1.7 (2.6)	3.3 (3.8)	0.246	2.3 (3.2)	3.0 (3.4)	0.709	1.0 (1.7)	3.5 (4.3)	0.240	 	Mood State[Euthymic (%)Depressed (%)Elevated1 (%)]	9 (82)0 (0)2 (18)	13 (68)2 (11)4 (21)	0.824F	4 (67)0 (0)2 (33)	7 (78)0 (0)2 (22)	1.000F	5 (100)0 (0)0 (0)	6 (60)2 (20)2 (20)	0.341F	 	Prior Hospitalizations (%)	5 (45)	15 (79)	0.061	3 (50)	6 (67)	0.624F	2 (40)	9 (90)	0.077F	 	Rapid Cycling (%)2	5 (45)	6 (32)	0.447	2 (33)	3 (33)	1.000F	3 (60)	3 (30)	0.329F	 	Lifetime Psychosis (%)	6 (55)	10 (53)	0.919	5 (83)	4 (44)	0.287F	1 (20)	6 (60)	0.282F	 	Suicide Attempt (%)	1 (9)	3 (16)	1.000F	1 (17)	0 (0)	0.400F	0 (0)	3 (30)	0.171F	 	Cigarette/Tobacco UseHistory at Baseline (%)	0 (0)	3 (16)	0.279F	0 (0)	1 (11)	1.000F	0 (0)	2 (20)	0.524F	 	Comorbidities	Simple/ Specific Phobia (%)	0 (0)	3 (16)	0.279F	0 (0)	1 (11)	1.000F	0 (0)	2 (20)	0.524F	 	Attention DeficitHyperactivity Disorder (%)3	2 (18)	8 (42)	0.247F	1 (17)	7 (78)	0.041F	1 (20)	1 (10)	1.000F	 	Oppositional DefiantDisorder (%)3	1 (9)	2 (11)	1.000F	1 (17)	2 (22)	1.000F	0 (0)	0 (0)	-	 	Conduct Disorder (%)3	1 (9)	0 (0)	0.336F	1 (17)	0 (0)	0.400F	0 (0)	0 (0)	-	 	Separation Anxiety (%)3	1 (9)	0 (0)	0.336F	1 (17)	0 (0)	0.400F	0 (0)	0 (0)	-	 	Medications	Medicated at scan (%)	9 (82)	18 (95)	0.537F	2 (33)	0 (0)	0.143F	0 (0)	1 (10)	1.000F	 	  Antipsychotic (%)	6 (55)	12 (63)	0.645	3 (50)	5 (56)	1.000F	3 (60)	7 (70)	1.000F	 	  Anticonvulsant (%)	5 (45)	6 (32)	0.447	2 (33)	2 (22)	1.000F	3 (60)	4 (40)	0.608F	 	  Stimulant (%)	2 (18)	8 (42)	0.247F	1 (17)	7 (78)	0.041F	1 (20)	1 (10)	1.000F	 	  Lithium (%)	2 (18)	7 (37)	0.419F	2 (33)	4 (44)	1.000F	0 (0)	3 (30)	0.506F	 	  Antidepressant (%)	2 (18)	3 (16)	1.000F	0 (0)	1 (11)	1.000F	2 (40)	2 (20)	0.560F	 	  Benzodiazepine (%)	2 (18)	3 (16)	1.000F	1 (17)	1 (11)	1.000F	1 (20)	2 (20)	1.000F	 	  Ketamine (%)	1 (9)	0 (0)	1.000F	1 (17)	0 (0)	0.400F	0 (0)	0 (0)	-	 	  Adrenergic Agonist (%)	0 (0)	1 (5)	1.000F	0 (0)	1 (11)	1.000F	0 (0)	0 (0)	-	 	  Amantadine (%)	0 (0)	1 (5)	1.000F	0 (0)	1 (11)	1.000F	0 (0)	0 (0)	-	 	  Levothyroxine (%)4	1 (9)	3 (16)	1.000F	1 (17)	2 (22)	1.000F	0 (0)	1 (10)	1.000F	 	
Age at baseline scan, age at follow-up, interval between scan and follow-up, IQ, years of education, and Young Mania Rating Scale scores were examined by a t-test to assess effect of CRAFFT group (CRAFFTHIGH versus CRAFFTLOW). All other factors were examined with Chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests.
represents p-value calculated with Fisher’s exact test.
Elevated mood includes subjects in hypomanic, manic, and mixed mood states.
Rapid-cycling reported is lifetime history of rapid cycling.
Presence of disorders of childhood were assessed by structured interview in subjects <18 years; percentage is based on the overall sample.
Individuals on levothyroxine had hypothyroidism. Results are shown across all subjects and when looking within males and within females separately.
Differences in Baseline CDRS and BIS Scores Between CRAFFT Follow-up Groups
		CRAFFTLOW	CRAFFTHIGH	p value	 			 		CDRS	20.7 (4.8)	28.1 (10.0)	0.045	 			 		Total BIS	62.2 (11.8)	67.7 (11.4)	0.278	 			 	All Subjects	  BIS Nonplanning Impulsiveness	25.6 (4.6)	27.5 (5.8)	0.412	 			 		  BIS Motor Impulsiveness	20.6 (6.2)	21.8 (5.4)	0.617	 			 		  BIS Cognitive-Attentional Impulsiveness	16.1 (5.0)	18.4 (4.5)	0.265	 		 		CDRS	22.3 (5.0)	25.4 (8.4)	0.498	 			 		Total BIS	59.4 (13.6)	63.9 (12.1)	0.543	 			 	Male Subjects	  BIS Nonplanning Impulsiveness	25.7 (5.4)	26.7 (7.2)	0.810	 			 		  BIS Motor Impulsiveness	19.1 (6.8)	21.2 (7.2)	0.621	 			 		  BIS Cognitive-Attentional Impulsiveness	14.6 (2.7)	16.1 (3.3)	0.405	 		 		CDRS	19.4 (4.8)	30.8 (11.2)	0.054	 			 		Total BIS	67.0 (7.8)	71.1 (10.1)	0.543	 			 	Female Subjects	  BIS Nonplanning Impulsiveness	25.3 (3.8)	28.3 (4.7)	0.344	 			 		  BIS Motor Impulsiveness	23.0 (5.3)	22.4 (3.4)	0.806	 			 		  BIS Cognitive-Attentional Impulsiveness	18.7 (7.6)	20.4 (4.5)	0.633	 		 	
CDRS and BIS (total and subscale) scores were examined by a t-test to assess effect of CRAFFT group (CRAFFTHIGH versus CRAFFTLOW). CDRS: N= 9 CRAFFTLOW (5 females), N= 18 CRAFFTHIGH (9 females); BIS: N= 8 CRAFFTLOW (3 females), N= 17 CRAFFTHIGH (9 females).
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Bipolar Disorder (BD) and substance use disorders (SUDs) are highly comorbid. This comorbidity often develops in adolescence and is associated with adverse outcomes. We prospectively investigated the relationship of gray matter volume (GMV) to subsequent substance use problems in adolescents with BD. Results indicate substance use problems in BD are associated with lower dorsolateral prefrontal GMV in females and males, lower orbitofrontal and insula GMV in females, and lower rostral prefrontal GMV in males. These common and sex-related findings point to regulatory brain systems that may underlie comorbid substance abuse and serve as targets for early detection and intervention strategies.
