Attenuated Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Patients with Childhood- and Adult-Onset Schizophrenia
Background
Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) is a rare, severe form of the adult-onset disorder (AOS). Our previous resting-state fMRI study identified attenuated functional connectivity in COS compared with controls. Here, we ask whether COS and AOS patients and their siblings exhibit similar abnormalities of functional connectivity.
Methods
A whole-brain, data-driven approach was used to assess resting-state functional connectivity differences in COS (patients/siblings/controls, n: 26/28/33) and AOS (n: 19/28/30). There were no significant differences in age, sex, or head motion across groups in each dataset and as designed, the COS dataset has a significantly lower age than the AOS.
Results
Both COS and AOS patients showed decreased functional connectivity relative to controls among a wide set of brain regions (P<0.05, corrected), but their siblings did not. Decreased connectivity in COS and AOS patients showed no amplitude differences and was not modulated by age-at-onset or medication doses. Cluster analysis revealed that these regions fell into two large-scale networks: one sensorimotor network and one centered on default-mode network regions, but including higher-order cognitive areas only in COS. Decreased connectivity between these two networks was notable (P<0.05, corrected) for both patient groups.
Conclusions
A shared pattern of attenuated functional connectivity was found in COS and AOS, supporting the continuity of childhood-onset and adult-onset schizophrenia. Connections were altered between sensorimotor areas and default-mode areas in both COS and AOS, suggesting potential abnormalities in processes of self-monitoring and sensory prediction. The absence of substantial dysconnectivity in siblings indicates that attenuation is state-related.
1 Introduction
Schizophrenia is increasingly understood as a disease involving disordered brain connectivity. Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS), defined as onset of psychosis before age 13, is a rare, severe form of the illness that is continuous with the adult-onset disorder (AOS). Patients with COS display symptomatology similar to that of poor-outcome adult patients as well as high rates of disease-related genetic anomalies and pronounced gray matter loss.
Our group has previously assessed resting-state neural connectivity in COS. We recently took an agnostic, global approach to resting-state functional analysis, measuring “connectedness” (the average Pearson correlation of each voxel with all others), which revealed brain regions of decreased connectivity in our patient cohort. These regions clustered into two functional networks, one primarily related to social and cognitive processing, and one to somatosensory and motor processing.
In AOS, researchers have identified altered, generally decreased, functional network connectivity relative to controls. While work with both adult- and childhood-onset populations has demonstrated abnormal network connectivity, comparisons between these two populations are scarce. To our knowledge, only one study by Jiang et al. explored connectivity differences between early- and later-onset patients. However, in this study, no quantitative comparisons were conducted between the two groups, results were mainly based on local connectivity measures, and remote comparisons were restrained to selected regions.
The adult-onset literature suggests that a widespread set of networks are altered in schizophrenia, and thus a whole-brain analysis is needed for a comprehensive comparison between these two patient populations. Here, we evaluate global brain connectivity (GBC) as connectedness among all voxels in the brain. GBC affords an agnostic way to examine the averaged connectivity in the whole brain, which we supplement with a second search to identify the regions most responsible for driving the changes in GBC. AOS data are those used in a separate, earlier resting-state study that focused on a preselected set of networks. The COS data include those from our previous paper, with the addition of 30% more recently recruited subjects.
Phenotypic comparisons, including structural brain changes, have shown that AOS and COS groups exhibit similar abnormalities relative to controls. COS has sometimes been shown to represent a more severe phenotype than AOS, with some studies showing similar effect sizes for COS and AOS and others showing a trend towards greater severity in COS. We hypothesize that COS and AOS groups will exhibit qualitatively similar patterns of decreased connectivity in the same regions identified in our prior study.
In addition to comparing COS and AOS patients to controls, we test whether unaffected siblings show a similar pattern of reduced connectivity to those with manifest illness to determine if these abnormalities are familial traits or disease-related. Studies of siblings in adult populations are mixed, with some showing siblings to have functional abnormalities that are similar to, though less severe than, those seen in patients, while other work indicates no difference between AOS patients and siblings. COS siblings have yet to be investigated for resting-state connectivity. We hypothesize that siblings will show diminished neural connectivity in similar regions to patients.
2 Methods
2.1 Participants
Twenty-six individuals with childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS), 28 nonpsychotic siblings of individuals with COS (COS_SIB), and 33 typically developing controls (COS_CON) participated in the COS study (Table 1). Some of the included COS patients and siblings were related. Informed assent and consent were obtained from all participants and their parent/guardian as applicable in accordance with a National Institutes of Health Institutional Review Board approved protocol. COS participants were recruited nationwide and diagnosed after inpatient observation that included medication washout when clinically appropriate. Exclusionary criteria included medical or neurological illness, substance abuse, or full-scale IQ below 70 prior to onset of psychotic symptoms (for further details, see McKenna et al.). Control participants were free of lifetime medical or psychiatric disorders as determined by clinical examination and standardized interview, and none had psychiatric illness in a first-degree relative. All COS patients were rated by staff clinicians using the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS) and Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS) for quantification of symptom severity. All COS patients were receiving treatment with antipsychotic medication at the time of the study, typically clozapine, and had been stabilized for at least 2 weeks.
The participants for the AOS study (Table 1) were the same set as reported in Repovs et al. but 12 participants were excluded to match groups for motion and age; see Supplemental Image Preprocessing for details. Sex and other demographic variables were still matched across groups. These participants were recruited through the Conte Center for the Neuroscience of Mental Disorders at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis and included: 1) 19 individuals with DSM-IV schizophrenia (AOS); 2) 28 nonpsychotic siblings of individuals with schizophrenia (AOS_SIB); 3) 30 healthy control subjects (AOS_CON). Some of the AOS patients and siblings were related. All participants gave written informed consent for participation. Subjects were diagnosed using a semi-structured interview and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders. Participants were excluded for substance dependence/abuse within the last 6 months; medical illness; history of head injury; or mental retardation (diagnostic and exclusion details elsewhere). The AOS patients were all outpatients and had been stabilized on antipsychotic medication for at least 2 weeks. Control subjects had no lifetime history of Axis I psychotic or mood disorders and no first-degree relatives with a psychotic disorder. All patients were assessed using the SAPS and SANS by a master’s-level research assistant who regularly participated in training and reliability sessions.
2.2 Image Acquisition
For each participant, resting state EPI (echo-planar-imaging) images were acquired; parameters varied between COS and AOS data, including make of scanner (see Table S1 for details). T1-weighted anatomical images (MPRAGE) were obtained (voxel size = 0.86×0.86×1.3 mm for COS data, 1×1×1 mm for AOS).
2.3 Image Analyses
Both COS and AOS fMRI images were analyzed as previously described by our group and as further detailed in Supplemental Methods. Briefly, preprocessing was done within AFNI using the basic ANATICOR approach and the cleaned, smoothed residual time series were spatially normalized to the Talairach and Tournoux anatomical template. Quality of these two datasets was compared using two measures, motion and global signal amplitude, which did not differ across groups (Table S2).
After preprocessing, for both COS and AOS data, first we conducted a whole-brain, data-driven search as previously described to identify regions of interest showing connectivity differences, measured by “connectedness” (the average Pearson correlation of each voxel with all others) of schizophrenia vs. controls and siblings vs. controls (see details in Supplemental Methods). Second, these regions showing reduced connectedness were used as seeds to find the locations driving connectedness differences. Combining these two sets of regions resulted in one set of all regions that showed differences in functional connectivity between groups. Using K-Means cluster analysis on all pairwise correlations, these regions were organized into two clusters, the optimal number as determined by elbow plots and confirmed by silhouette values. We examined group differences of region-by-region correlations within- and across-clusters as well as their correlations with clinical measures (SAPS and SANS). ANCOVA models were used to compare groups and examine modulation effects of age-at-onset, medication doses, and clinical measures. Age and transient Motion were co-varied as nuisance variables in all models and results were corrected using cluster size (AFNI’s 3dClustSim, family-wise Type I error (FWE)<.05, employing AFNI’s updated spatial auto-correlation function) for whole-brain comparisons and Bonferroni correction for the number of seeds tested. More details of data analyses are in Supplemental Methods.
3 Results
3.1 Group Comparisons of Functional Connectivity
Using resting-state fMRI, we investigated whole-brain network alterations in COS and AOS patients and their siblings. Groups were matched for age and sex in both COS and AOS data (Table 1). As designed, COS patients had significantly lower age and age-at-onset than AOS. Although COS and AOS fMRI data were collected using different protocols and on different MRI scanners, the motion magnitude and global signal amplitude of the preprocessed fMRI data were not significantly different either across groups within each dataset or between the two datasets, indicating that data quality was comparable among all groups (Table S2). In each dataset, a whole-brain, data-driven approach was applied separately to compare the average correlation of each voxel’s time series with all brain voxels, termed “connectedness,” between groups.
Compared to controls, both COS and AOS patients showed decreased connectedness in a set of widely distributed brain regions; no regions with increased connectedness were found (Figure 1). Some of these regions with reduced functional connectivity in COS (Table S3) and AOS (Table S4) were overlapping, including superior temporal, occipito-temporal and post-central gyri, supplementary motor area, and cerebellum (overlaps indicated by red outlines in Figure 1 and stars in Tables S3 and S4).
To quantify the differences between COS and AOS patients, we compared the magnitude of connectedness using an interaction analysis (COS-COS_CON vs. AOS-AOS_CON), and found no differences in overall extent or severity of dysconnectivity between childhood and adult-onset patients at the corrected significance level. This lack of significant magnitude difference was confirmed by a secondary analysis in which we examined modulation effects of age-at-onset on connectedness in the merged group of COS and AOS patients. These findings imply that COS and AOS share a similar pattern of reduced connectivity without significant overall differences in amplitudes of dysconnectivity between the two patient groups.
We considered two further issues that could potentially influence our central dysconnectivity results. First, both AOS and COS patient groups were on antipsychotic medication (Table 1); as controls were medication-free, medication effects cannot be examined directly in group comparisons. We did a modulation analysis to examine whether medication doses were correlated with connectedness amplitudes in the merged group of COS and AOS patients (see Supplemental Methods). We found no regions showing significant modulation effects of medication, consistent with our previous findings that medication is unlikely to be the primary factor driving group differences. Second, we conducted an analysis to determine whether the inclusion or exclusion of physiological regressors (heartrate and respiration) in preprocessing confounds the results of group comparisons. This control analysis was of interest because the physiological data were available and regressed only in the COS dataset. Our results, which were unchanged, ruled out the possibility that this methodological difference contributed to the observed group differences (Figure S1).
As in patients, we compared connectedness between siblings of COS and AOS patients and controls. Interestingly, no significant differences were found in either sibling group except in the thalamus, where COS siblings showed higher connectedness than their controls (P<0.05, corrected; Figure S2 A, B). A further interaction analysis of (COS_SIB-COS_CON vs. AOS_SIB-AOS_CON) found no significant differences in the whole brain including the thalamus between childhood and adult-onset siblings. In addition, when we lowered the threshold, AOS_SIB also showed higher, though nonsignificant, connectivity in the thalamus compared to their controls. Therefore, this thalamic hyperconnectivity may not be specific to childhood-onset siblings. Next, patients showed decreased connectivity compared to siblings in a similar set of brain regions to those found when comparing to controls (P<0.05, corrected; Figure S2 C, D). This pattern of hypoconnectivity in patients relative to siblings remained unchanged when their family relationship was modeled to account for the possible confounding effects of some patients and siblings being related (Figure S3). This suggests that the decreases in functional connectivity that we identified in patients were disease-related.
The regions with reduced connectedness in patients (seed regions: 12 in COS, 10 in AOS) were used as seeds in more typical seed-based t-tests to identify the entire set of locations with different connectivity in schizophrenia relative to controls, correcting for whole-brain comparisons and the number of seeds tested. We identified 11 non-seed regions in COS and 5 in AOS, resulting in a total of 23 regions in COS (Table S3) and 15 in AOS (Table S4) with 8 regions overlapping (indicated by stars in these tables).
3.2 Organization of Inter-regional relationships
We further investigated the relationships between these regions (23 in COS, 15 in AOS). We created a region-by-region correlation matrix for each participant and did t-tests on this correlation matrix between patients and controls with Age and Motion as covariates (Figure 2). Using K-Means analyses, we categorized these regions into two clusters, the optimal number determined by Silhouette values and ‘elbow’ plots in both COS (Figure S4B, C) and AOS data (Figure S4E, F).
A demarcation of functions is associated with these two clusters. In COS and AOS, Cluster 1 (the red cluster in Figure 3A, B; regions listed in the top parts of Table S3, S4) was comprised predominantly of areas of the default-mode network (DMN). Cluster 1 in COS also included other higher-order cognition-related areas of the perisylvian or language-related network and the dorsal attention network. Cluster 2 (the green cluster in Figure 3A, B; regions listed in the bottom parts of Table S3, S4) in COS and AOS was comprised predominantly of somatosensory, motor, and auditory regions, many shared by COS and AOS, including the pre- and post-central gyri, supplementary motor area (SMA), cerebellum, and auditory cortices.
Correlations between most regions in Clusters 1 and 2 were altered for both COS (Figure 2C) and AOS (Figure 2F) relative to controls. In Figure 2, the bottom left quadrant of each matrix shows interregional correlations within Cluster 1 (red), and the top right within Cluster 2 (green). The upper left and lower right quadrants (mirror images above and below the diagonal) show that most of the across-cluster region pairs exhibited greater correlation values in controls than patients (Bonferroni-corrected differences shown in dark red in 2C and 2F).
3.3 Relationship of Altered Functional Connectivity to Clinical Symptoms
Finally, we investigated the relationship between these functional connectivity alterations and clinical symptoms, SAPS and SANS, in schizophrenia. In COS, consistent with our previous report, positive symptoms were associated with reduced correlation strength of region-by-region pairs across clusters (Figure S5A) and negative symptoms appeared to be more strongly associated with decreased region-by-region correlations within Cluster 1 (Figure S5B). However, correlations were not prominent; few region-by-region pairs survived correction for multiple comparisons (indicated by white circles), suggesting that these results require further examination with a larger sample size. On the other hand, in AOS, no clear patterns at the corrected level were found in association with either positive (Figure S5C) or negative symptoms (Figure S5D). This lack of positive results in AOS could be due to the relatively large variance across regional functional connectivity in AOS patients compared to COS patients, which may not be fully accounted for by these two clusters.
4 Discussion
We found diminished resting-state functional connectivity in patients with childhood- and adult-onset schizophrenia. There were no significant amplitude differences between these two patient groups, and age-at-onset showed no modulation effect. In siblings of the patients in both groups, we found few or no differences compared with controls. The regions of decreased connectivity in patients relative to controls fell into two clusters, or large-scale networks, one relating to sensory and motor activity and one involving components of the default-mode network in both COS and AOS, though also with a number of higher-order prefrontal and parietal areas in COS.
COS and AOS are characterized by similar disrupted neural connections relative to healthy controls, suggesting the continuity of COS and AOS. Consistent with the main trends in adult literature, we found that schizophrenia is associated with connectivity reductions, as opposed to increases, aligning with the hypothesis that schizophrenia is a disorder of dysconnectivity. Structural covariance evidence corroborates findings of dysconnectivity, showing delayed development of corticocortical connections in COS. In an earlier study, Jiang et al. also found that local functional connectivity was altered in both early- and adult-onset schizophrenia patients compared with controls. While they reported qualitative differences in a few regions between early- and adult-onset patients without statistical tests, these differences may not survive a more stringent quantitative and direct comparison as we did here.
In both COS and AOS groups, brain regions with reduced connectivity were best grouped into two clusters. The “green” cluster, made up of somatosensory and motor regions, was largely shared between COS and AOS. In AOS, the “red” cluster mainly comprised areas of the previously-defined default-mode network (DMN). In COS, the corresponding cluster included different areas of the DMN as well as regions related to higher order cognitive functions. The DMN may be involved in attention to internal emotional states and self-referential processing. Both the COS and AOS groups showed significantly reduced connectivity between the two clusters. Impaired connectivity between somatomotor regions and regions involved in self-reference is congruous with previous reports that schizophrenia patients exhibit deficits in self-monitoring mechanisms. Impairment in distinguishing between sensory events produced by their own actions and those caused by external agents has been proposed to underlie positive symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions.
Previous resting-state research has sometimes identified abnormalities in siblings of schizophrenia patients which seem to be less extreme forms of the alterations found in the patients themselves. We detected only weak differences in functional connectivity between COS siblings and controls, and no significant differences between AOS siblings and controls. Compared with siblings, both patient groups showed reduced functional connectivity in similar patterns as when controls were used as baselines. This absence of abnormalities in siblings suggests that aberrant functional connectivity is state-related. However, it is possible that siblings show abnormality in functional connectivity only at an early age and do not differ from controls later, as appears to be true for structural connectivity.
In our previous resting-state analysis of COS, our group found evidence of correlations between behavior and network connectivity. Positive and negative symptoms in patients correlated, respectively, with reductions in across-cluster connectivity and within-“social-cognitive” cluster functional connectivity. After increasing the number of subjects for the present study, we found a similar pattern of results in COS but with fewer findings surviving correction for multiple comparisons, and we observed almost no significant symptom correlations in AOS. The lack of correlations in AOS may relate to the larger variance across regional functional connectivity in AOS patients compared to COS patients, as reflected by elbow plots showing greater percent variance unexplained by two clusters in AOS (Figure S4C, F). Further studies with larger sample sizes and additional, objective behavioral measures will be critical to more definitively establish the most stable relationships between symptoms and connectivity, particularly in AOS.
Limitations to our methodology include the bluntness of a global brain connectivity (GBC) approach, in which GBC may fail to detect voxels with a perfect balance of increases and decreases by averaging connectedness. While we complemented the GBC analysis with a ROI-to-ROI correlation/cluster analysis, and in previous applications of GBC have not identified a failure to detect mixtures of increases/decreases that were successfully identified by another method, the risk of Type II errors still exists and interpretation of these results have to be cautious. In addition, although the robustness of the current region-level cluster method has been previously tested by identifying a similar cluster resolution with a completely different voxel-level method [Supplemental Figure 6 in ], we cannot completely rule out the possibility that our cluster solution could have been affected by the selection of methods. Another limitation stems from the different sources of imaging data for the COS and AOS cohorts. Acquisition parameters for resting-state functional MRI differed for the two datasets, such as eyes-open versus eyes-closed conditions and make of scanner, which could cause variations in results. To mitigate such confounds, we measured the data quality in terms of motion and global signal amplitude and found they were not significantly different, and we always compared COS and AOS to their own controls. The cross-sectional design increased the difficulty in clearly separating age-at-onset from age modulation effects and the correlation between them (Pearson r = 0.396) was moderate. In addition, although this study included almost 200 participants, our patient sample size was relatively modest. Future longitudinal studies with more patients would increase the statistical power.
Other common confounding factors in neuroimaging studies of schizophrenia include motion artifacts and medication doses. As described above, we excluded subjects with severe motion and implemented multiple de-noising strategies in preprocessing (for a recent review of motion treatment methods, see). Neither groups nor datasets differed significantly in transient head motion and we further accounted for residual motion in the group-level analyses through the use of nuisance covariates, arguing against an interpretation of the group differences as an artifact of motion differences. Nevertheless, careful interpretation of our results and future replication studies are needed. There is a lack of agreement in previous findings on whether or not medication use alters fMRI connectivity. A direct analysis showed no significant modulation effect of medication doses in the current dataset, which is consistent with our previous findings. Therefore, we believe that our results of group differences are unlikely to have been driven by medication.
In summary, COS and AOS patients exhibited similar disease-related patterns of resting-state functional connectivity disruption that may result from aberrant neurodevelopment. Disruption was mainly characterized by reduced connectivity between sensory/motor related regions and regions associated with self-referential processing, suggesting potential impairment in differentiating perception of external stimuli from internal prediction. Whether these dysconnectivity symptoms emerge even earlier than childhood-onset warrants further investigations based on prospective community-based studies.
Supplementary Material
           Author Contributions         
REW and SL wrote the manuscript. DMB and JLR designed the study and made major edits to the manuscript. SL performed the data analyses with SJG’s help; REW, RAB, HMM, DG, AM, and XZ also contributed. REW, NG, AEO, FML, PG, LSC, and LS contributed to data collection and management. All authors edited and have approved the final manuscript.
           Conflicts of Interest         
All authors report no financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
High rate of disease-related copy number variations in childhood onset schizophrenia
GEne expression for glutamic acid decarboxylase is reduced without loss of neurons in prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics
Disrupted modularity and local connectivity of brain functional networks in childhood-onset schizophrenia


Symptoms of schizophrenia. Methods, meanings, and mechanisms
“Cognitive dysmetria” as an integrative theory of schizophrenia: a dysfunction in cortical-subcortical-cerebellar circuitry?
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist effects on prefrontal cortical connectivity better model early than chronic schizophrenia
Early-course unmedicated schizophrenia patients exhibit elevated prefrontal connectivity associated with longitudinal change
Disruption of cortical association networks in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder
The prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric diseases: in vivo physiological correlates of cognitive deficits
Disrupted sensorimotor and social-cognitive networks underlie symptoms in childhood-onset schizophrenia
Disrupted sensorimotor and social-cognitive networks underlie symptoms in childhood-onset schizophrenia
Common pattern of cortical pathology in childhood-onset and adult-onset schizophrenia as identified by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging
How do we predict the consequences of our actions? a functional imaging study
The perception of self-produced sensory stimuli in patients with auditory hallucinations and passivity experiences: evidence for a breakdown in self-monitoring
The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity
Perisylvian language networks of the human brain
Disruption of structure-function coupling in the schizophrenia connectome
Identifying the brain’s most globally connected regions
Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain
AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages
Childhood onset schizophrenia: high rate of visual hallucinations
Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study

Neurophysiological evidence of corollary discharge function during vocalization in psychotic patients and their nonpsychotic first-degree relatives
Functional dysconnectivity of corticostriatal circuitry as a risk phenotype for psychosis
Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations: an fMRI investigation of the resting-state default mode of brain function hypothesis
Brain anatomic magnetic resonance imaging in childhood-onset schizophrenia
Schizophrenia: a disconnection syndrome?
Social cognition in humans
Aberrant “default mode” functional connectivity in schizophrenia
Brain imaging in normal and abnormal brain development: new perspectives for child psychiatry
Childhood-onset schizophrenia: an NIMH study in progress
The perils of global signal regression for group comparisons: a case study of Autism Spectrum Disorders
Fractionation of social brain circuits in autism spectrum disorders
Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis
Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential mental activity: relation to a default mode of brain function
fMRI of the Auditory Cortex
Cerebral glucose metabolism in childhood onset schizophrenia
Smooth pursuit eye movements in childhood-onset schizophrenia: comparison with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and normal controls
Local-to-remote cortical connectivity in early- and adulthood-onset schizophrenia
Effective preprocessing procedures virtually eliminate distance-dependent motion artifacts in resting state fMRI
Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact detection and removal
Is aberrant functional connectivity a psychosis endophenotype? A resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study
Schizophrenic patients and their unaffected siblings share increased resting-state connectivity in the task-negative network but not its anticorrelated task-positive network
Corollary discharge dysfunction in schizophrenia: evidence for an elemental deficit
Brain activity during stimulus independent thought
Looking for childhood-onset schizophrenia: the first 71 cases screened
Differences in resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging functional network connectivity between schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar probands and their unaffected first-degree relatives
Cerebro-cerebellar connectivity is increased in primary lateral sclerosis
Childhood-onset schizophrenia: rare but worth studying
Are there progressive brain changes in schizophrenia? A meta-analysis of structural magnetic resonance imaging studies
The effect of resting condition on resting-state fMRI reliability and consistency: a comparison between resting with eyes open, closed, and fixated
Dysconnectivity in schizophrenia: where are we now?
Motor areas of the medial wall: a review of their location and functional activation
Recent progress and outstanding issues in motion correction in resting state fMRI
A default mode of brain function
Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings
Global functional connectivity deficits in schizophrenia depend on behavioral state
Antipsychotic treatment and functional connectivity of the striatum in first-episode schizophrenia
How can studies of resting-state functional connectivity help us understand psychosis as a disorder of brain development?
Differential Patterns of Dysconnectivity in Mirror Neuron and Mentalizing Networks in Schizophrenia
Evidence for sensory prediction deficits in schizophrenia
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of impaired sensory prediction in schizophrenia
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of inner speech in schizophrenia
Practice structure improves unconscious transitional memories by increasing synchrony in a premotor network
Efference copy failure during smooth pursuit eye movements in schizophrenia
Shifts in connectivity during procedural learning after motor cortex stimulation: A combined transcranial magnetic stimulation/functional magnetic resonance imaging study
Aberrant intrinsic functional connectivity within and between corticostriatal and temporal-parietal networks in adults and youth with bipolar disorder
Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain
The neural architecture of the language comprehension network: converging evidence from lesion and connectivity analyses
Three dysconnectivity patterns in treatment-resistant schizophrenia patients and their unaffected siblings
Chlorpromazine equivalent doses for the newer atypical antipsychotics
Functional connectivity-based signatures of schizophrenia revealed by multiclass pattern analysis of resting-state fMRI from schizophrenic patients and their healthy siblings
Delayed Development of Brain Connectivity in Adolescents With Schizophrenia and Their Unaffected Siblings
Resting-state functional connectivity of the medial superior frontal cortex
Decreased connectedness in both childhood- and adult-onset schizophrenia patients compared to their respective controls
T-values shown in blue indicate that both COS (A) and AOS (B) patients showed significantly decreased connectedness (i.e., lower average correlation of each voxel’s time series with all other brain voxels) in a broad set of brain regions compared to their controls. 21% of AOS regions with reduced connectedness were spatially overlapped with COS (in red outline). Results were corrected for multiple comparisons, with degrees of freedom of 56 (A) and 46 (B). Talairach coordinates of these regions are listed in Table S3 for COS and Table S4 for AOS, with shared regions starred. No regions with increased connectedness were found in either COS or AOS patients compared to controls.
Two clusters of regions with decreased across-cluster correlation in childhood- and adult-onset schizophrenia
Using K-Means analysis, ROIs were categorized into two clusters (number determined as shown in Figure S4) for both COS and AOS. Region-by-region correlation matrices, pooled across groups (A COS controls, B COS patients; D AOS controls, E AOS patients), and corresponding t-tests (covarying Motion and Age; C Control-COS, F Control-AOS) were sorted by cluster membership (red and green, matching Clusters 1 and 2 in Figure 3). The order of ROIs in the matrices is identical to the order in Tables S3 and S4 (ROI number increases as arrows indicate, from bottom to top row and leftmost to rightmost column). Significantly decreased correlations between the two clusters (in the upper left and lower right quadrants of each matrix) were found in patients compared to controls (most t values, shown in dark red, were higher than Bonferroni corrected t threshold of 3.77 for COS in C, 3.53 for AOS in F), and in COS some of these across-cluster correlations were negative (B).
Clusters of regions with reduced functional connectivity in childhood- and adult-onset schizophrenia patients compared to their controls
Voxels are colored by membership in the two major clusters defined in Figure S4: a ‘red’ cluster including different components of the default-mode network in AOS and COS, and additional language and attention related areas only in COS (Cluster 1), and a ‘green’ cluster including somatosensory, motor and auditory regions in both AOS and COS (Cluster 2). Results were corrected for multiple comparisons (see Methods for details). Talairach coordinates of each region are shown in Tables S3 (COS) and S4 (AOS).
Participant demographics
The schizophrenia, sibling, and control groups did not differ significantly by age or sex within childhood-onset (COS) and adult-onset (AOS) schizophrenia data (all P>0.22; F or Fisher’s exact tests). Age-at-onset was set as the age when diagnosis was made and illness duration was calculated by the difference between age at scan and age-at-onset. As designed, COS patients had significantly lower age and age-at-onset than AOS patients (P<0.0015; two-sample t tests). Medication doses were recorded and converted to chlorpromazine equivalents. COS patients were on higher doses of antipsychotic medication than AOS but the difference was not significant (P=0.15, two-sample t tests). COS/AOS_CON/SIB: respective control participants/siblings for each patient group.
	COS	COS_CON	COS_SIB	AOS	AOS_CON	AOS_SIB	 	n	26	33	28	19	30	28	 	Age (years, mean [SD])	19.89 [5.55]	17.73 [4.96]	17.47 [6.20]	24.69 [3.04]	23.22 [2.66]	24.32 [3.90]	 	Sex (male:female)	15:11	16:17	14:14	14:05	18:12	15:13	 	Age-at-Onset (years, mean [SD])	12.68 [2.14]			19.24 [3.01]			 	Illness Duration (years, mean [SD])	7.21 [5.99]			5.45 [3.20]			 	Medication (chlorpromazine equivalents, mg, mean [SD])	1043 [698]			738 [591]			 	
