On the integrity of functional brain networks in schizophrenia, Parkinson’s disease, and advanced age: Evidence from connectivity-based single-subject classification
Previous whole-brain functional connectivity studies achieved successful classifications of patients and healthy controls but only offered limited specificity as to affected brain systems. Here, we examined whether the connectivity patterns of functional systems affected in schizophrenia (SCZ), Parkinson’s disease (PD), or normal aging equally translate into high classification accuracies for these conditions. We compared classification performance between pre-defined networks for each group and, for any given network, between groups. Separate support vector machine classifications of 86 SCZ patients, 80 PD patients, and 95 older adults relative to their matched healthy/young controls, respectively, were performed on functional connectivity in 12 task-based, meta-analytically defined networks using 25 replications of a nested 10-fold cross-validation scheme. Classification performance of the various networks clearly differed between conditions, as those networks that best classified one disease were usually non-informative for the other. For SCZ, but not PD, emotion-processing, empathy, and cognitive action-control networks distinguished patients most accurately from controls. For PD, but not SCZ, networks subserving autobiographical or semantic memory, motor execution, and theory-of-mind cognition yielded the best classifications. In contrast, young–old classification was excellent based on all networks and outperformed both clinical classifications. Our pattern-classification approach captured associations between clinical and developmental conditions and functional network integrity with a higher level of specificity than did previous whole-brain analyses. Taken together, our results support resting-state connectivity as a marker of functional dysregulation in specific networks known to be affected by SCZ and PD, while suggesting that aging affects network integrity in a more global way.
1. INTRODUCTION
Schizophrenia (SCZ) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) are two of the most prevalent and socio-economically relevant brain diseases. While SCZ onset typically emerges during adolescence and early adulthood, PD is characterized by an onset during late adulthood and has been associated with premature aging, that is, earlier and more rapid neurodegeneration as compared to the course of normal aging. Both SCZ and PD are characterized by disease-specific pathophysiological changes of the dopaminergic system, contrasting with a more global dopamine decline in normal aging (NA). However, it has been proposed that dopaminergic dysfunction in SCZ arises as a secondary effect due to alterations of the glutaminergic system. In contrast, in PD dopaminergic deficiency represents the primary cause leading to pathophysiological upstream dysregulations of different neural systems. These neurobiological features of SCZ, PD and NA may manifest themselves in functional connectivity alterations at the level of large-scale brain networks. However, some putative commonalities (neurodegeneration, dopaminergic dysregulations, and altered connectivity) need to be juxtaposed with the prominent phenotypical differences between SCZ, PD, and NA and the fact that the clinical presentations of SCZ and PD are very different, raising the question whether various functional systems are differentially affected in the three conditions. Rather than assessing altered activations in different functional systems by conducting task-fMRI studies, we examined altered functional connectivity within various functional networks robustly defined by meta-analyses of task-based neuroimaging studies in a comparative fashion (cf.). This has the practicable advantage of using easily accessible, short and standardized resting-state data while at the same time incorporating the consolidated knowledge based on task-based imaging into the analysis. We argue that such an approach is particularly relevant given that in contrast to resting-state imaging, task-based assessments will rarely be feasible in a routine clinical setting.
Alterations in functional network integrity patterns in SCZ, PD or older adults (compared to respective healthy/young controls) can be captured by using machine learning-based classification. For extracting a diagnostically relevant marker that allows the classification of individual subjects based on the connectivity in functional brain networks, multivariate decoding algorithms like support vector machine (SVM) should provide the most appropriate approach for this endeavor. Rather than testing each connection independently for group differences, SVMs are trained on part of the data by weighting all connections in order to separate the known clinical status from healthy controls (HC). Classification accuracy can then be determined by assessing the ability to predict group membership of previously unseen subjects. Applied to (whole-brain) connectivity data, this approach has previously been found to distinguish SCZ patients (cf.) or PD patients (cf.) from healthy controls (HC), as well as aged from young subjects (NA) (cf.).
Previous pattern-classification studies aimed at providing the best possible classification performance on whole-brain connectivity. In contrast, the aim of the current work was to assess whether specific functionally defined networks are altered in SCZ, PD, and NA. While previous studies mainly used Independent Component Analysis (ICA) based data-driven methods to extract major resting-state networks, our work is based on a priori meta-analytically defined networks associated with specific sets of behavioral functions such as working memory or emotional processing. In contrast to well-established resting-state networks, these networks represent the consolidated information from hundreds of task-based fMRI studies and hence those locations in the brain that are reliably activated when subjects perform tasks pertaining to a particular mental function. We thus argue that these nodes define robust functional networks in the brain related to specific mental domains. In turn, the functions associated with resting-state networks are usually derived from a reverse inference approach, as these lack any direct relationship to mental functions. We suggest that this more direct relationship between the network-nodes and actual task-demands is an important advantage of our approach. Moreover, the employed strategy results in an a priori, unbiased definition of the respective networks, whereas ICA-based networks are usually defined from the current data. Our meta-analytically derived network model approach thus offers the potential to investigate functional connectivity within robust a priori brain networks that are implicated in processing a specific mental process.
Therefore, the present study aimed to examine whether the known impairment of different functions in SCZ, PD, or aging, respectively, would equally translate into a high classification accuracy for a given network in the respective group, based on the connectivity pattern within this network. As a “proof-of-principle” approach we therefore intended to investigate whether various a priori networks based on task-activation findings carry differential disease-related information assessable by resting-state imaging. To this end, we examined two diseases which are clinically very disparate but well studied in the previous neuroimaging literature. The findings were then juxtaposed to findings on age-related effects in the same networks. Thereby, we could evaluate whether the respective networks carry differential information related to the different conditions or, conversely, whether the different networks carry differential information related to a particular condition. Given some putative commonalities and especially phenotypical differences, the aim was to examine the possibility for differential classification of SCZ, PD und age, rather than to primarily study the specific diseases and their clinical separation from each other or aging per se. In our investigation, these three groups thereby serve as examples to evaluate this approach. For example, we assume that connectivity in the reward network will be potent in differentiating SCZ patiens from matched HCs, as several studies have shown impairments related to reward learning in SCZ, and the neurobiology of this network has been linked to psychosis. Likewise, we would expect a good classification accuracy for PD patients based on FC in the motor network, given that motor impairments represent the core feature of this disease, and motor circuits in the brains of PD patients are altered during motor tasks and at rest. Finally, NA is accompanied by cognitive decline in various domains, such as deterioration in working-memory function. For the latter, age-related neural changes have repeatedly been shown at task and rest. Accordingly, we assume that the working-memory network allows a clear distinction between old and young adults.
In an explorative manner, we furthermore assessed a broad set of networks associated with different behavioural domains (cognitive, social-affective, motivational and motor-related) since all three conditions (PD, SCZ, and NA) show alterations in various functional domains on the behavioral and neural level. Importantly, in our approach, we reasoned that classification performance may be interpreted as an indication for the amount of information contained in a given network regarding a particular disease or age status, and thus of the degree of change observed in the integrity of particular networks under these conditions.
We assume that classification performance will be best for connectivity in those networks that subserve mental functions known to be affected in SCZ and PD. SCZ is characterized by prominent social-affective/motivational alterations, whereas in PD motor impairments are most affected. We, therefore, hypothesized that social-affective/motivational and motor-related networks provide a superior classification of SCZ and PD patients, respectively. As both diseases are accompanied by cognitive impairments as well, we assumed that cognitive networks may also be predictive to some degree. As NA is associated with a broad spectrum of decline affecting various functional systems (albeit to a varying degree), we expected that most networks allowed for an accurate discrimination of old from young adults.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 Samples
Schizophrenia
Resting-state (RS) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data and phenotypical information of 86 SCZ patients and 84 HCs obtained from the COBRE sample (http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/retro/cobre.html) and the University Hospital of Göttingen, Germany, were included in the analysis. SCZ diagnosis was assigned as assessed by the DSM-IV-TR based on the structured clinical interview (SCID-P) and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10), respectively. SCZ symptom severity was assed using the Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS) evaluating the severity of positive and negative symptoms as well as the general psychopathology. Patients received their regular medication therapy with considerable variability in the exact compounds used and a high prevalence of combination drug therapy (medicated patients but exact medication and dose unknown for Olanzapine equivalent dose: COBRE: 50,9%; Göttingen: 25,8%; medication status unknown: COBRE: 1 SCZ patient; Göttingen: 2 SCZ patients).
Parkinson’s disease
RS fMRI data of 80 PD patients and 84 HCs obtained from the RWTH Aachen University Hospital and the University Hospital Düsseldorf, Germany, were included in the analysis. Diagnosis of PD was assigned by consultant neurologists with longstanding expertise in movement disorders based on clinical examination and review of the medical history. Included PD patients fulfilled the standard UK Brain Bank criteria for PD and had on average a mild cognitive impairment as confirmed by the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) but no major depression symptoms.
To assess PD symptom severity and evaluate motor impairments the Unified Parkinson’s disease Rating Scale Part III (UPDRS) and Hoehn and Yahr Scale (H & Y Scale) were applied. All patients were medicated with their regular individual PD-related treatment (medication and dose unknown for Levodopa equivalent daily dose: RWTH Aachen: 28,1%; HHU Düsseldorf: 12,5%).
Healthy controls (HC)
RS fMRI data of HC (HCSCZ and HCPD) were obtained from the four different sites as respective clinical subjects (SCZ and PD), and were without any record of neurological or psychiatric disorders as confirmed via structured clinical screening (SCID).
Normal Aging
RS fMRI data of 95 old (age range: 55 – 70 years) and 93 young (age range: 20 – 35 years) participants with an age range of 15 years in each group were obtained from the population-based 1000BRAINS study and another separate study at the Research Centre Jülich, Germany. This relative small age-range aims to enhance the subsample homogeneity. “Normal aging” in old participants refers to the absence of neurodegenerative diseases. Older adults showed cognitive performance adequate for their age (DemTect > 13) as assessed by the Mild Cognitive Impairment and Early Dementia Detection (DemTect) assessment and all participants did not exhibit clinically relevant symptoms for depression (BDI-II < 13) as evaluated via the Beck Depression Inventory-II.
Importantly, target and control groups (i.e., patients vs. healthy controls, old vs. young adults) of all three samples (PD, SCZ, NA) represent subsamples from larger samples that were post-hoc matched for gender, within-scanner movement and (only for the clinical samples) age (cf. Table I for sample and group matching characteristics). Written informed consent from all subjects and approval by the local ethics committees was obtained from all sites. Joint reanalysis of the anonymized data was approved by the ethics committee of the HHU Düsseldorf.
2.2 Resting-state fMRI data acquisition, preprocessing, and analysis
During image acquisition (see Table SI for fMRI parameters), participants were instructed to lie still, let their mind wander and not fall asleep (confirmed at debriefing). SPM8 (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) was used for image realignment, spatial normalization to the MNI-152 template using the unified segmentation approach, and smoothing (5-mm full width at half maximum Gaussian).
We investigated 12 functional networks, robustly defined by previous quantitative meta-analyses, to reflect neural correlates of a broad set of cognitive, social-affective/motivational and motor functions (see Table II for an overview and Table SII for detailed network coordinates and corresponding brain regions). Only meta-analytic networks with a minimum of 10 nodes were included, since a lower number of features are uninformative for robust classification. Resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) within each network was computed per subject by first extracting the time-series for each node within 6 mm of the meta-analytic peaks. To reduce spurious correlations, variance explained by the 6 movement parameters and their derivatives (modeled as 1st and 2nd order effects) as well as the mean white-matter and Cerebrospinal fluid signal time-courses was removed from the time series. Subsequently, time series were high-pass filtered retaining frequencies above 0.01 Hz. Connectivity was computed as the Fisher’s Z-transformed Pearson correlation between the time series of each network’s nodes; connectivity values were adjusted for effects of acquisition site, gender, movement, total brain volume, and (only for the clinical samples) age (cf.) to avoid classification based on spurious between-subject effects.
2.3 Support Vector Machine Features and Classification
To examine whether the RSFC pattern of a network contains predictive information on the respective groups (SCZ vs. HCSCZ, PD vs. HCPD, old vs. young) non-sparse linear two-class SVMs were computed using LibSVM (https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm). SVMs’ were trained separately for each of all three analyses (PD, SCZ, NA) and each of the functional networks. Of note, we did not attempt between-patient classification (i.e., PD vs. SCZ), as the different groups were closely matched to their respective controls but substantially different from each other with respect to age, gender, and movement. The input variables (features) to the SVM consisted of edge-wise RSFC between all nodes of a given network. Each SVM was trained and tested by a nested 10-fold cross validation scheme for each individual group (see example Figure 1) (cf.). The inner loop used a 10-fold cross-validation within the training group to optimize the soft-margin slack parameter. For each fold of the outer loop, the left-out (unseen) 10% were then classified using the SVM trained on the (entire) training-set using the optimized parameter. This nested scheme ensured that classifier optimization and evaluation was performed independent of each other. Classification performance was evaluated based on accuracy (Acc.), balanced accuracy (bAcc.), sensitivity (Sens.), and specificity (Spec.) as well as two measures derived from signal-detection theory: the area under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUC) and d’. Acc. denotes the overall proportion of subjects correctly classified as patients (PD, SCZ) or advanced age versus healthy or younger age, respectively. The bAcc. is calculated as the average proportion of subjects correctly classified as patients (PD, SCZ) or advanced age versus healthy or younger age, respectively. Sens. indicates the percentage of patients (SCZ or PD) correctly classified as ill or subjects correctly classified as old in the aging sample (true positives). Spec. in turn represents the fraction of HCs correctly classified as healthy or subjects correctly identified as young in the aging sample (true negatives). AUC refers to the area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve. An ROC curve depicts the relationship between true positive rate and false positive rate, and its AUC value indicates the sensitivity of the diagnostic process independent of any specific decision criterion. Finally, we assessed d’, an alternative index of diagnostic sensitivity independent of the decision criterion, calculated as z(true positive rate) – z(false positive rate). To increase robustness, the entire procedure was repeated 25 times, and each performance measures was averaged across repetitions. To examine significant differences in classification performance between networks within each group, pairwise t-tests were performed for each of the 12 networks based on the accuracies obtained from the 25 cross-validation outer-loop replications of the separate SVMs (significance threshold of p < 0.05, Bonferroni-corrected for the number of pairwise network comparisons).
To compare the separately conducted classifications for SCZ vs. HCSCZ and PD vs. HCPD subgroups, accuracies obtained for each individual analysis for every network were converted to standardized z-scores by reference to the binomial distribution reflecting chance level and corrected for multiple comparisons by the amount of networks-based classifications. Log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) were estimated to identify networks showing better classification performance for one patient group than the other. To investigate significant differences in classification performance between the groups, t-tests were calculated based on the 25 accuracies obtained from the cross-validation outer-loop replications of the separate SVMs performed in each group (SCZ, PD, NA) for each of the 12 networks (significance threshold of p < 0.05, Bonferroni-corrected for the number of groups and networks).
3. Results
As expected, SCZ patients could be distinguished above chance from matched HCs based on RSFC in the reward network (Rew; Acc. = 68%; AUC =0.73). In turn, PD patients were distinguished above chance from their matched HCs based on RSFC in the motor network (Motor; Acc. = 70%; AUC = 0.77). Finally, old and young subjects were differentiated very well from each other based on RSFC in the working-memory network (WM; Acc. = 79%; AUC = 0.84). Results are summarized as follows: Figure 2A for polar plot of group classification accuracies, Table III for Acc., Sens., Spec. and AUC, Table SIII for bACC., Table SIV for d’, Figure S1 for z-standardized accuracies of all groups and Figure S2 for variance of accuracies.
Considering the performance of all functional networks in distinguishing SCZ and PD patients from their respective HCs, a clear differentiation between networks becomes evident, even though only 2 (SCZ) and 1 (PD) out of 12 networks, respectively, did not significantly exceed chance accuracy (Figure 2B). The following results and discussion are focused on networks with superior classification performance for the respective disorders. In this context, we would like to re-iterate that we did not attempt to train any classifier to distinguish SCZ from PD patients, since the two samples differed substantially from each other in various confounding factors such as age, gender distribution, and within-scanner movement.
For SCZ, the emotional scene and face processing network (EmoSF; Acc. = 72%; AUC = 0.79) as well as the networks for empathic processing (Empathy; Acc. = 71%; AUC = 0.78) and cognitive action-control (CogAC; Acc. = 68%; AUC = 0.69) distinguished patients most accurately from their HCs. Hence these networks’ connectivity patterns may be considered to contain the highest level of information with respect to SCZ. The EmoSF network was significantly better in the SCZ classification compared to all other networks (p< 0.001). For PD, the networks subserving autobiographical memory (AM; Acc. = 75%; AUC = 0.76), motor execution (Motor; Acc. = 70%; AUC = 0.77), semantic memory (SM; Acc. = 69%; AUC = 0.75), and theory-of-mind cognition (ToM; Acc. = 67%; AUC = 0.71) yielded the highest classification accuracies, that is, contained the most informative PD-related differences in RSFC. The AM network was significantly better in the PD classification compared to all other networks (p< 0.001). All Network comparison results within the patient groups are summarized in Table SV and SVI.
The between-network comparison of classification performance with respect to SCZ and PD revealed that the networks discriminating either disorder from their respective controls were highly specific (Figure 2B,C), indicating that these networks carry differential amounts of information regarding SCZ and PD, respectively. In particular, both EmoSF and Empathy networks showed the best performance at distinguishing SCZ patients from HCs (EmoSF: z = 5.9; Empathy: z = 5.5) but were notably worse at discriminating PD patients from their HCs (EmoSF: z = 3.2; Empathy: z = 3.2). Similarly, the CogAC network exhibited high accuracy at classifying SCZ patients and their respective HCs (z = 4.7) but inferior performance at distinguishing PD patients from their HCs (z = 2.7).
In turn, the motor network very well classified PD patients and their HCs (z = 5) but was remarkably ineffective at classifying SCZ patients and their HCs (z = 2.9). Likewise, the AM and SM networks achieved high accuracies in classifying PD patients and controls (AM: z = 6.3; SM: z = 4.5) but performed much less well when classifying SCZ patients and controls (AM: z = 3.2; SM: z = 2.5). Networks which were most accurate in distinguishing SCZ from HCs (EmoSF, Empathy and CogAC) exhibited significant better classification performance in the SCZ group compared to the PD group (EmoSF: p < 0.001; Empathy: p < 0.001; CogAC: p < 0.001; Table SVII). Likewise, networks which performed best at discriminating PD patients from HCs (AM, Motor, SM and ToM) showed significant better classification performance in the PD group compared to the SCZ group (AM: p < 0.001; Motor: p < 0.001; SM: p < 0.001; ToM: p < 0.001; Table SVII).
This differential picture markedly contrasted with the results obtained for the classification between old and young subjects. In the aging sample, each network yielded accuracies ≥ 73% (see Table SVIII for network comparison results within NA), significantly outperforming every classification obtained in the SCZ or PD samples (p < 0.001; see Figure 2A, Figure S1, Table III, Table SIX and Table SX). In particular, for each network the accuracy for classifying a previously unseen participant as young or old was about 10% higher than any clinical classification based on the same network. Additionally, the comparison of all 3 separate group classifications revealed that the variance of the classification accuracies over the 25 replications of the outer loop was distinctively lower for the classification of age, as compared with classifying the clinical status. (Figure S2).
4. DISCUSSION
We assessed whether RSFC patterns in a diverse set of functionally defined brain networks allowed for a classification of patients with SCZ or PD or healthy older adults on the one hand, and their respective healthy or young controls on the other. Thereby, we evaluated which functional system was most informative for a given condition (i.e., SCZ, PD, or higher age). Conversely, our analysis also assessed the amount of information on each condition found in a given network. Our results show in a proof-of-principle manner that networks pertaining to functions known to be affected by SCZ, PD, or aging indeed exhibited good classification performance for the respective condition. Furthermore, each network’s young–old classification outperformed any disease-related classification. This indicates that specific networks are affected by and associated with the diseases, whereas for healthy older adults RSFC appears to be altered rather globally.
4.1 Conceptual Considerations
Our study demonstrates that machine-learning techniques can be successfully used to assess whether RSFC in functional systems known to be affected in SCZ, PD or advanced age exhibits high classification capacity for the respective condition. Further, our approach compared the classification capacity of RSFC patterns between different functional networks and between several clinical and physiological states. Of note, for each classification, target and control groups (i.e., SCZ vs. HCscz, PD vs. HCPD, old vs. young) were well matched with respect to gender and – for the clinical samples – age. In addition, RSFC variance attributable to these confounding factors or within-scanner movement were regressed out of the data before the SVM analyses. Therefore, these confounds were evidently heterogeneous across the three groups (SCZ, PD, NA) but should not have influenced classification accuracy within each condition. Although proper matching and state-of-the-art removal of variance related to motion (cf.), residual effects that only manifest in the multivariate pattern cannot be fully ruled out. However, one factor worth noting is that, for example, we observed differential classification performance across networks in the SCZ sample, largely ruling out a dominant general effect of head motion.
Given that both groups were assessed under their regular medication, differences in classification performance may be influenced by pharmacological treatment. In particular, we cannot exclude that classification results of networks modulated via dopaminergic transmission (e.g. reward or motor system) might originate from interactions between disease condition and medication. Unfortunately, however, we could not perform a more detailed assessment of the influence of medication, as the compounds, duration of treatment and doses varied considerably between subjects, with many receiving a combination of drugs.
When comparing classification performance to previous work based on whole-brain functional connectomes (cf.), we note that our approach yielded higher functional specificity, allowing inference on the amount of disease-specific information in well-defined functional systems. We acknowledge the fact that even though most of the classifications well exceeded chance level, the achieved network-based classification accuracies are not strong enough for successful connectivity-based single-subject disease diagnosis. Still, our “sparse” approach achieved classification accuracies comparable to those reported in previous whole-brain studies, whose feature space obviously was substantially larger than ours. This is particularly noteworthy given that two further aspects besides feature space could be expected to decrease classifier performance in our study: First, all of our three groups were based on relatively large samples that were combined from two different measurement sites and hence should be more heterogeneous than usual. Second, we used replicated 10-fold cross-validation, rather than the more optimistic leave-one-out approach. We thus argue that the chosen combination of examining robustly defined functional networks and optimized analysis through replicated and nested 10-fold cross-validation may provide valuable new insights into the pathophysiology of brain disorders that is not attainable through global analyses of the entire functional connectome.
4.2 Classification of Schizophrenia patients and controls
We found that the networks subserving emotional scene and face processing, empathic processing as well as cognitive action-control yielded the best performance. Aberrant processing of emotional stimuli and impaired abilities to relate to others’ affective states are features of SCZ and mirrored in the degree of SCZ-related information that is contained in the EmoSF (AUC = 0.79) and Empathy (AUC = 0.78) networks. Further, the good classification performance of the CogAC resonates well with alterations in cognitive control processes as a core deficit in SCZ [cf. ].
Somewhat surprisingly, the reward (Rew) network did not differentiate SCZ from HCs with high accuracy, given the prominent role of the dopaminergic system and aberrant salience processing in psychosis and the association with the reward system in this disorder. We conjecture that this lack of predictive information could arise from the fact that in contrast to task-activation data, RSFC analyses primarily capture the tonic rather than phasic state of these networks.
4.3 Classification of Parkinson’s disease patients and controls
The superior classification performance observed for the motor execution network (AUC = 0.77) is hardly surprising, since motor impairments represent a key clinical feature of PD, and differences in action-related brain circuitry are well established in this disorder. The finding that the AM (AUC = 0.76) and SM (AUC = 0.75) networks also achieved a very good differentiation of PD patients from HCs was rather surprising, though. While PD is a neurodegenerative disorder and dementia is common in PD patients, several patients showed evidence for mild cognitive impairment, using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment for screening. We can hence only speculate that the RSFC differences in AM and SM networks may pick up these deficits as revealed by standard behavioral screening instruments.
Finally, the good classification performance achieved by the ToM network (AUC = 0.71) was unexpected but matches a growing literature of impaired social cognition in PD patients.
4.4 Age Group Classification
One of the most striking observations from this study was that every single network achieved a better classification with respect to age group than with respect to SCZ or PD. While we hypothesized that the broad spectrum of age-related changes in various mental functions would be reflected by changes in several networks, the consistency (across both networks and replications) of high classification accuracies is intriguing. It stands to reason that the mechanisms underlying the discriminative changes in functional connectivity patterns may be diverse. In particular, they should include neurodegeneration (cognitive networks), neurochemical changes (reward networks), altered affective processing (social-affective networks) and use-dependent plasticity (motor networks). In addition, it may be argued that in spite of all inter-individual variability age-related changes represent a more homogeneous change of the neuro-functional architecture relative to the inevitable heterogeneity among clinical populations.
Given that connectivity patterns of all systems differentiated very well between young and old participants, we acknowledge the possibility that the relevant drivers may be of non-neural origin. In particular, despite of our optimized confound removal, we cannot exclude that residual effects related to motion or brain atrophy as well as physiological effects such as macro- and microvascular changes and their cumulative impact on hemodynamic signals may have contributed to our findings.
While the contributions of neural and non-neural effects outlined in this section certainly warrant further investigation, one of the most critical conclusions that should be taken from the high classification accuracy between younger and older participants is the danger of obtaining spuriously high accuracies in clinical classification studies if patients and HCs are not carefully matched for age.
4.5 Conclusions & Outlook
We investigated the potential of RS connectivity patterns in a wide variety of functional networks to distinguish SCZ and PD patients from matched HCs as well as old from young adults. We showed that networks defined by robust activation due to mental operations known to be affected in the respective condition indeed contained information on the respective condition that is captured by our pattern-classification approach and translates into good classification accuracies. Classification accuracies obtained through replicated, nested 10-fold cross-validation were not only generally comparable to those obtained from whole-brain analyses but also revealed a differentiated picture for both disorders in comparisons. Both SCZ and PD were specifically well predicted by distinct networks that resonate well with known clinical and pathophysiological features. The presented approach thus opens an avenue toward robust and more specific assessments of clinical and developmental differences in functional systems than previous whole-brain analyses. One of the most striking findings of this work was the fact that integrity in all networks was much better at identifying participants with advance age than with any of the two disorders. While the most likely heterogeneous mechanisms behind this phenomenon certainly need to be addressed in more detail, the current findings highlight the importance of considering age-related effects as a potential source of bias in clinical classification studies.
Supplementary Material
           Financial Disclosures         
These authors declare following conflicts of interest:
Risk of dementia in Parkinson’s disease: a community-based, prospective study
Prevalence and characteristics of dementia in Parkinson disease: an 8-year prospective study
Cost of disorders of the brain in Europe
Single subject prediction of brain disorders in neuroimaging: Promises and pitfalls
Unified segmentation
The correlative triad among aging, dopamine, and cognition: current status and future prospects
The cognitive neuroscience of schizophrenia

Functional and structural brain correlates of theory of mind and empathy deficits in schizophrenia
Theory of mind in Parkinson’s disease: A meta-analysis
Working memory, executive control, and aging
Social brain dysfunctions in schizophrenia: A review of neuroimaging studies
Studying variability in human brain aging in a population-based German cohort—rationale and design of 1000BRAINS
LIBSVM: a Library for Support Vector Machines
Discriminative analysis of Parkinson’s disease based on whole-brain functional connectivity
Differential and distributed effects of dopamine neuromodulations on resting-state network connectivity
Advances and Pitfalls in the Analysis and Interpretation of Resting-State FMRI Data

Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects
The Exercising Brain: Changes in Functional Connectivity Induced by an Integrated Multimodal Cognitive and Whole-Body Coordination Training
Neuroimaging of healthy cognitive aging
Neural correlates of the core facets of empathy in schizophrenia
Reinforcement learning and dopamine in schizophrenia: dimensions of symptoms or specific features of a disease group?
Alterations in the BOLD fMRI signal with ageing and disease: a challenge for neuroimaging
Neuroanatomical Correlates of Theory of Mind Deficit in Parkinson’s Disease: A Multimodal Imaging Study
Magnetic resonance imaging: a biomarker for cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease?
Structure and course of positive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia
Cognitive function in early Parkinson’s disease: a population-based study

Aging Effects on Whole-Brain Functional Connectivity in Adults Free of Cognitive and Psychiatric Disorders
International Consensus Study of Antipsychotic Dosing
Changes in Cognitive Function in Human Aging
ABC Schizophrenia study: an overview of results since 1996
Multivariate pattern recognition for diagnosis and prognosis in clinical neuroimaging: state of the art, current challenges and future trends
Neural Substrates of Empathic Accuracy in People With Schizophrenia
Imaging Cognition in the Aging Human Brain
Dopaminergic dysfunction in schizophrenia: Salience attribution revisited
Functional neuroimaging of motor control in Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis
Parkinsonism: onset, progression and mortality
Validity of the MoCA and MMSE in the detection of MCI and dementia in Parkinson disease
Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: a clinico-pathological study of 100 cases
Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis
DemTect: a new, sensitive cognitive screening test to support the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and early dementia
Parkinson’s disease
Detecting neuroimaging biomarkers for schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of multivariate pattern recognition studies
The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia
Resting-state anticorrelations between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: association with working memory, aging, and individual differences
L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study
Circular analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping
Emotion deficits in people with Schizophrenia
Glutamate, dopamine, and schizophrenia: From pathophysiology to treatment
Introduction to machine learning for brain imaging
Cognitive Control Deficits in Schizophrenia: Mechanisms and Meaning
Automatic classification of early Parkinson’s disease with multi-modal MR imaging
The affective neuroscience of Aging
Support vector machine classification and characterization of age-related reorganization of functional brain networks
The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS): status and recommendations
Connectome and schizophrenia
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment
The intrinsic resting state voice network in Parkinson’s disease
Dopamine and the regulation of cognition and attention
Functional organization of the basal ganglia: therapeutic implications for Parkinson’s disease
Schizophrenia
Parkinson disease
Inferring mental states from neuroimaging data: from reverse inference to large-scale decoding
Theory of Mind in Parkinson’s disease
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion
Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging in Parkinson’s disease
Ventral Striatal Activation During Reward Processing in Psychosis: A Neurofunctional Meta-Analysis
Region-specific changes in prefrontal function with age: a review of PET and fMRI studies on working and episodic memory
Parkinson’s disease as a result of aging
Modelling neural correlates of working memory: a coordinate-based meta-analysis
The motor system and its disorders
Emotional perception: meta-analyses of face and natural scene processing
Reorganization of brain networks in aging: a review of functional connectivity studies
An improved framework for confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of resting-state functional connectivity data
Differential patterns of dysconnectivity in mirror neuron and mentalizing networks in Schizophrenia
Meta-analytically informed network analysis of resting state fMRI reveals hyperconnectivity in an introspective socio-affective network in Depression
Detecting neuroimaging biomarkers for psychiatric disorders: Sample size matters
A neural substrate of prediction and reward
Motor control and aging: links to age-related brain structural, functional, and biochemical effects
Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest
Discriminative analysis of non-linear brain connectivity in Schizophrenia: an fMRI study
An fMRI study of differential neural response to affective pictures in Schizophrenia
Identify Schizophrenia using resting-state functional connectivity: an exploratory research and analysis
Sensorimotor connectivity in Parkinson’s disease: The role of functional neuroimaging
Dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia: making sense of it all
Systematic review of levodopa dose equivalency reporting in Parkinson’s disease
Resting-state test-retest reliability of a priori defined canonical networks over different preprocessing steps
Assessing and tuning brain decoders: Cross-validation, caveats, and guidelines
Characterizing functional connectivity differences in aging adults using machine learning on resting state fMRI data
From estimating activation locality to predicting disorder: A review of pattern recognition for neuroimaging-based psychiatric diagnostics
BrainNet Viewer: A network visualization tool for human brain connectomics
Functional connectivity-based signatures of Schizophrenia revealed by multiclass pattern analysis of resting-state fMRI from schizophrenic patients and their healthy siblings
Linear Two-Class Support Vector Machine Nested 10-fold Cross-Validation Scheme
Illustration of a support vector machine example for classification of the schizophrenia sample based on the emotional scene and face processing network (EmoSF). As input variables (DATA) (= features) served the subjects` RSFCs of all edges of every network. The inner loop was performed in a 10-fold manner with 10 repetitions conducted as parameter setting optimization on a training sample. The outer loop was performed in a 10-fold manner with 25 repetitions conducted as classification accuracy testing on an unseen test set. Classification performance measures are computed based on the confusion matrix. Acc.: accuracy; Sens.: sensitivity; Spec.: specificity; AUC: area under the receiver operating characteristics curve and d’ (see materials and methods section for explanation).
Group Classification Results of the Support Vector Machine
A) Polar plot of group classification accuracies based on all 12 networks for schizophrenia (in green), Parkinson’s disease (in blue) and normal aging (in yellow). Accuracy refers to the proportion of subjects correctly classified as patients (PD, SCZ) or older age and subjects correctly classified as being healthy controls or younger age. B) Polar plot of z-standardized accuracies (corrected for multiple comparisons) of patients classification for schizophrenia (in green) and Parkinson’s disease (in blue). C) Log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of classification performance for networks showing higher classification for one patient group vs. the other.
Sample and group matching characteristics
Sample	n(males)	Age(years)	Head Movement(DVARS)	Age at Onset(years)	Illness Duration(years)	Antipsychotic/Dopaminergic Medication	Neuropsychology & Psychopathology	 	Schizophrenia Sample						OZP-equivalent	PANSS: Total/PS/NS/GEN	 								 	COBRE								 	SCZ Patients	55 (46)	38 ± 14	1.66 ± 0.55*	20 ± 8	17 ± 14	13 ± 8	58 ± 14/14 ± 5/14 ± 5/29 ± 8	 	HCscz	55 (42)	38 ± 12	1.44 ± 0.41					 	Göttingen								 	SCZ Patients	31 (25)	32 ± 10	1.47 ± 0.30*	25 ± 8	7 ± 8	14 ± 9	52 ± 11/12 ± 3/13 ± 4/28 ± 6	 	HCscz	29 (22)	32 ± 9	1.31 ± 0.23					 	 Total								 	 SCZ Patients	86 (71)	36 ± 13	1.59 ± 0.48*					 	 HCscz	84 (64)	36 ± 11	1.39 ± 0.36					 	Parkinson’s Disease Sample						LEDD	H & Y Scale	UPDRS-III	MoCA	 								 	Aachen										 	PD Patients	32 (21)	64 ± 9	0.51 ± 0.16	59 ± 8	6 ± 5	449 ± 238	2 ± 1	23 ± 12	27 ± 2	 	HCPD	33 (20)	63 ± 6	0.62 ± 0.29							 	Düsseldorf										 	PD Patients	48 (30)	59 ± 9	0.69 ± 0.26	51 ± 9	8 ± 6	1029 ± 416	2,5 ± 1	16 ± 8	24 ± 4	 	HCPD	51 (30)	57 ± 9	0.68 ± 0.22							 	 Total										 	 PD Patients	80 (51)	61 ± 9	0.62 ± 0.24							 	 HCPD	84 (50)	59 ± 8	0.66 ± 0.25							 	Normal Aging Sample							DemTect		BDI-II	 	Jülich										 	Old	48 (26)	61 ± 5	1.58 ± 0.41*				16 ± 2		5 ± 5	 	Young	52 (26)	26 ± 3	1.24 ± 0.24						5 ± 4	 	1000BRAINS Jülich										 	Old	47 (25)	64 ± 4	1.79 ± 0.43*				15 ± 2		6 ± 5	 	Young	41 (23)	28 ± 4	1.28 ± 0.26						4 ± 4	 	 Total										 	 Old	95 (51)	63 ± 5	1.68 ± 0.43*							 	 Young	93 (49)	27 ± 4	1.26 ± 0.25							 	
SCZ: schizophrenia; PD: Parkinson’s disease; HCSCZ: matched healthy controls of schizophrenia sample; HCPD: matched healthy controls of Parkinson’s disease sample; characteristic values in mean ± standard deviation; DVARS: derivative of root mean squared variance over voxels (head movement parameter); significant difference in age (clinical samples), gender and movement are marked with
for p < .05; 
: OZP-equivalent: Olanzapine equivalent dose; PANSS: Positive and Negative Symptom Scale, (PS: Positive Symptoms Scale/NS: Negative Symptoms Scale/GEN: General Psychopathology Scale); 
: LEDD: Levodopa equivalent daily dose; H & Y scale: Hoehn and Yahr Scale; UPDRS-III: Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale Part III; MoCA: Montreal Cognitive Assessment; 
: DemTect: Mild Cognitive Impairment and Early Dementia Detection; BDI-II: Beck Depression Inventory II.
Network overview
Network(Abbr.)	Network	Contrast	Nodes	Publication	 	EmoSF	emotional scene and face processing	emotional scene > neutral scene and emotional face>neutral face	24		 	ER	cognitive emotion regulation	reappraise > naturalistic emotional responses	14	[Buhle et al., 2014]	 	ToM	Theory-of-mind cognition	Theory-of-mind > non-social baseline	15	[Bzdok et al., 2012]	 	Empathy	empathic processing	“feel into” affect-laden social situations > watched or listened passively	19	[Bzdok et al., 2012]	 	Rew	reward-related decision making	ME: reward valence and decision stages	25	[Liu et al., 2011]	 	AM	autobiographical memory	autobiographical memory > non-autobiographical baseline	22	[Spreng et al., 2009]	 	SM	semantic memory	access to word meaning > processing word structure	23	[Binder et al., 2009]	 	WM	working memory	ME: n-back, sternberg, delayed matching to sample and delayed simple matching tasks	23		 	CogAC	cognitive action-control	ME: stroop-task, spatial interference task, stop-signal task and go/no-go task	19	[Cieslik et al., 2015]	 	VigAtt	vigilant attention	ME: detection task, discrimination task	16	[Langner and Eickhoff, 2013]	 	MNS	mirror neuron system	action observation ∩ action imitation	11	[Caspers et al., 2010]	 	Motor	motor execution	finger tapping > baseline; excl. regions associated with visually paced finger-tapping tasks	10	[Witt et al., 2008]	 	
ME: main effect.
Classification results of the support vector machine of all groups based on specific networks
Network	SCZ vs. HCSCZ	PD vs. HCPD	Old vs. Young	 	(Abbr.)	Acc. (Sens./Spec.) AUC*	Acc. (Sens./Spec.) AUC	Acc. (Sens./Spec.) AUC	 	EmoSF	72% (77%/68%) 0.79	63% (64%/63%) 0.68	88% (89%/86%) 0.93	 	ER	71% (77%/65%) 0.76	69% (74%/64%) 0.74	78% (79%/76%) 0.86	 	ToM	61% (74%/46%) 0.62#	67% (70%/64%) 0.71	78% (77%/80%) 0.84	 	Empathy	71% (73%/69%) 0.78	63% (61%/65%) 0.69	78% (80%/75%) 0.83	 	Rew	68% (73%/62%) 0.73	66% (70%/63%) 0.71	87% (85%/88%) 0.93	 	AM	62% (67%/57%) 0.71	75% (78%/73%) 0.76	80% (80%/80%) 0.89	 	SM	61% (67%/54%) 0.68#	69% (65%/73%) 0.75	84% (85%/83%) 0.90	 	WM	62% (65%/60%) 0.66	65% (68%/63%) 0.71	79% (80%/77%) 0.84	 	CogAC	68% (73%/63%) 0.69	62% (66%/57%) 0.67	73% (73%/74%) 0.83	 	VigAtt	68% (72%/63%) 0.72	65% (68%/63%) 0.67	80% (78%/83%) 0.89	 	MNS	64% (65%/63%) 0.73	57% (64%/51%) 0.53#	84% (83%/84%) 0.91	 	Motor	61% (72%/50%) 0.61	70% (68%/73%) 0.77	80% (79%/81%) 0.90	 	
Abbreviations: Acc.: Accuracy (in %)/Sens.: Sensitivity (in %) /Spec.: Specificity (in %)/AUC: Area under the receiver operating characteristics curve.
Network with no significant classification result.
Accuracy refers to the proportion of subjects correctly classified as patients (PD, SCZ) or older age and subjects correctly classified as being healthy or younger age (mean of Sensitivity and Specificity). Sensitivity relates to the percentage of patients (SCZ or PD) correctly classified as being ill or else subjects correctly identified as old in the aging sample (true positives). Specificity relates to the percentage of healthy subjects correctly classified as being healthy or else subjects correctly identified as young in the aging sample (true negatives). AUC refers to the area under the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve. ROC curve depicts the relationship between true positive rate and false positive rate.
