Alcohol effects on globus pallidus connectivity: Role of impulsivity and binge drinking
Despite the harm caused by binge drinking, the neural mechanisms leading to risky and disinhibited intoxication-related behaviors are not well understood. Evidence suggests that the globus pallidus externus (GPe), a substructure within the basal ganglia, participates in inhibitory control processes, as examined in stop-signaling tasks. In fact, studies in rodents have revealed that alcohol can change GPe activity by decreasing neuronal firing rates, suggesting that the GPe may have a central role in explaining impulsive behaviors and failures of inhibition that occur during binge drinking. In this study, twenty-five healthy volunteers underwent intravenous alcohol infusion to achieve a blood alcohol level of 0.08 g/dl, which is equivalent to a binge drinking episode. A resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging scan was collected prior to the infusion and at binge-level exposure. Functional connectivity analysis was used to investigate the association between alcohol-induced changes in GPe connectivity, drinking behaviors, and impulsivity traits. We found that individuals with greater number of drinks or heavy drinking days in the recent past had greater alcohol-induced deficits in GPe connectivity, particularly to the striatum. Our data also indicated an association between impulsivity and alcohol-induced deficits in GPe—frontal/precentral connectivity. Moreover, alcohol induced changes in GPe-amygdala circuitry suggested greater vulnerabilities to stress-related drinking in some individuals. Taken together, these findings suggest that alcohol may interact with impulsive personality traits and drinking patterns to drive alterations in GPe circuitry associated with behavioral inhibition, possibly indicating a neural mechanism by which binge drinking could lead to impulsive behaviors.
Introduction
Harmful drinking behaviors like binge drinking contribute to 5.9% of all global deaths. This is largely due to the development of alcohol use disorder (AUD) and consequential organ damage caused by chronic drinking, intoxication-related car accidents and domestic violence. Binge drinking is defined as drinking that results in blood alcohol concentration (BAC) levels at or above 0.08 g/dl (estimated as consuming at least 4 or 5 standard drinks in less than two hours for women and men, respectively). The mechanisms underlying binge drinking and related risky behaviors are unclear, but impulsivity or failure in inhibitory control during decision-making likely plays a role.
Research into the neural correlates of failure to inhibit suggests that the basal ganglia plays an important role. The basal ganglia are formed by several interconnected brain regions that control action selection, reward, goal-directed behavior and habitual learning. Frontostriatal pathways enable inhibitory control quickly via a hyperdirect pathway through the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and presupplementary motor area (preSMA) that quickly “brakes”, and through indirect pathways that “suppresses” movement. In particular, the globus pallidus externus (GPe), a central and highly interconnected component of the basal ganglia, may have a key role in inhibitory control. A specific projection from the GPe to the striatum known as the arkypallidal projection has been shown to inhibit behavior temporarily in “stop-signal”-based tasks. Given this role, alterations to GPe connectivity could contribute to increased impulsivity and failure of inhibitory control.
Alcohol has been shown to have a direct effect on GPe neurons. In a mouse model, Abrahao et al. have demonstrated that acute alcohol decreases the firing rate of specific neurons in the GPe, including (1) the low frequency prototypical neurons, which project downstream to the subthalamic nucleus / substantia nigra and upstream to the striatum, and (2) the arkypallidal neurons, which project to the striatum. In humans, alcohol decreased functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signal in the GP during a stop-signal task, and this signal change was associated with slowed reaction time and impaired inhibitory control. Taken together, these findings suggest that impulsivity and behavioral disinhibition associated with alcohol consumption may be driven by alcohol-induced changes in GPe connectivity.
In this study, we aimed to extend the preclinical results of the Abrahao et al, 2017 study to a human paradigm by determining whether alcohol-induced changes in GPe connectivity are related to recent drinking patterns, impulsivity, and interactions between the two. To do so, we compared the resting-state fMRI connectivity of the GPe before and after controlled acute intravenous (IV) alcohol administration to “binge drinking” levels (BAC = 0.08 g/dl) in healthy humans, and examined the relationship between those differences, recent drinking history, and trait impulsivity. To our knowledge, this is the first time such an investigation has been conducted. We hypothesized that alcohol would result in greater decreases in GPe functional connectivity across the brain in individuals with more impulsive traits and higher risk drinking behaviors. Moreover, we hypothesized that the interaction between recent drinking behaviors and impulsivity would contribute to alcohol-induced changes in GPe functional connectivity.
Methods
This study was approved by the NIH Addictions Institutional Review Board under 12-AA-0032. All subjects provided written informed consent prior to their participation in the study.
Participants
Twenty-five healthy (13 males, 12 females; mean age: 28.85 years), light social drinkers were recruited by local advertisement, according to approved National Institutes of Health Institutional Review Board procedures. The demographic data of participants is summarized in Table 1. After obtaining written informed consent, all participants underwent a comprehensive medical screen, including blood work, urinalysis, medical history, physical exam, and a Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM Axis-I Disorders (SCID-IV). Criteria for inclusion in this study were: healthy, 21–45 years old, consumption of 1 to 10 drinks per week for females and 1 to 14 drinks per week for males. Subjects also had to have consumed at least two standard drinks of alcohol within one hour on at least one occasion in their lifetime. Criteria for exclusion included: abnormal blood or urine lab test values or findings from the medical screen, DSM-IV criteria for alcohol or other substance dependence (excluding nicotine) at any time; current or past major psychiatric disorder (DSM-IV Axis I), head injury requiring hospitalization, Body Mass Index (BMI) value over 30, inability to stop taking any medication or drugs 3 days prior to study days, and MRI contraindications. Also, non-drinkers were excluded from the study due to ethical concerns related to alcohol administration.
Demographic, drinking, and impulsivity characteristics.
Variable	Count	 	Total n	25	 	Gender (Male / Female)	13 / 12	 	Smokers	1	 		Mean	SD	 	Age	28.85	7.40	 	Years Of Education	15.88	1.88	 	BIS: Total	54.76	9.62	 	Attentional Impulsiveness	12.96	2.99	 	Motor Impulsiveness	20.92	3.32	 	Nonplanning Impulsiveness	19.72	4.21	 	UPPS-P: Positive Urgency	1.36	0.31	 	Negative Urgency	1.66	0.44	 	Premeditation	1.78	0.42	 	Perseverence	1.53	0.39	 	Sensation Seeking	2.85	0.70	 	Delay Discounting Rate (K)	0.02	0.06	 	TLFB—Drinks Per Thirty Days	20.19	13.69	 	TLFB—Heavy Drinking Days	19.08	10.96	 	
Abbreviations as follow: BIS- Barratt Impulsiveness Scale; TLFB- Alcohol Timeline Followback.
Measures
Alcohol drinking measures
The amount of daily alcohol consumption over the last 90 days was measured using the Alcohol Timeline-Followback (TLFB) calendar—a drinking assessment method with good psychometric characteristics for estimating retrospective daily drinking patterns. The number of heavy drinking days in the last 90 days was calculated from the TLFB; a heavy drinking day is defined as 4 or more drinks per day for women and 5 or more drinks per day for men. We used this as a measure for binge drinking. Total drinks in the past 30 days was also calculated from the TLFB. Past 30-day drinking was used rather than 90-day drinking given that we were interested in recent drinking, and that recent reports of drinking may be more reliable.
Impulsivity measures
Impulsive behavioral traits were measured using the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11) and the UPPS-P Impulsive Behavior Scale, two of the most widely-used self-report tools in the evaluation of trait impulsivity. The BIS-11 scale evaluates impulsive behavior in general, and the motor, attentional and non-planning sub-scales evaluate acting without thinking, inability to focus attention and lack of forethought, respectively. The UPPS-P measures personality traits conducive to impulsive behavior including Urgency (negative)—tendency to impulsively act under strong negative emotions, Premeditation (lack of)—tendency to act without thinking, Perseverance (lack of) to remain focused on a task, Sensation-seeking—tendency to seek out novel/thrilling experiences, and Positive-urgency—tendency to impulsively act under strong positive emotions.
We also evaluated choice impulsivity with the Delay Discounting Task (DDT). The DDT measures impulsivity by presenting the subject with a series of hypothetical choices between receiving a smaller immediate monetary reward or a larger delayed reward. Subjects were presented as their immediate reward values between $100 and $0 dollars in increments of $10, while the delayed reward was $100. Delays were 0, 7, 14, 20, 25, or 30 days. Subjects completed trials with all iterations of these parameters. The rate of discounting of the delayed outcome (k) was calculated and then a natural log-transformation was applied to correct for the non-normal distribution of k values. The resulting ln(k) is used to represent delay discounting, where higher ln(k) values mean greater preference for immediate rewards (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics of drinking and impulsivity scores for the sample).
Experimental design and statistical analysis
Overall timeline
In this two-session study, healthy light drinkers received an IV alcohol infusion on two separate days. The first session was conducted outside the scanner to establish the alcohol infusion rate profile to achieve and maintain the target BrAC exposure, and to ensure tolerability. The alcohol infusion for the second session was conducted inside the scanner at least three days after the first session (Fig 1). Participants were asked to fast the night before each session. At the start of each visit, breath alcohol levels, urine pregnancy tests (if applicable) and urine drug screens were collected. In addition, we conducted a brief history interview about recent alcohol, medication, and nicotine use, changes in physical health, and menstruation (if applicable).
Timeline of intravenous alcohol infusion study.
The timeline depiction of the two-session intravenous alcohol infusion study; sessions were separated at least three days from each other. The session 2 timeline indicates timepoints of resting state and BAC measurement alongside IV infusion; the first resting state scan occurred before the IV infusion at blood alcohol level of 0.0 g/dl and the second one was collected when the blood alcohol level reached the binge levels (0.08 g/dl).
Alcohol infusion to binge level exposure
We performed the alcohol infusion procedure following previously published methods (fMRI and PET). In both sessions, participants received an intravenous (IV) infusion of 6% v/v ethanol solution in saline to achieve a target breath alcohol concentration (BrAC) of 0.08 ± 0.005 g/dl at 15 min after the start of the infusion, and to maintain (or clamp) the target BrAC level for 30 min (Fig 1). The infusion-rate profile was computed for each subject using a physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model-based algorithm, with individualized estimates of the model parameters estimated from the subject’s height, weight, age and sex.
During the first session conducted outside the scanner, serial BrACs were measured at frequent intervals (5–15 minutes) using the Alcotest 7410+ handheld breathalyzer (Drager Safety Inc., CO), to ensure that each BrAC was within 0.005 g/dl of the target, and to enable minor adjustments to the infusion rates to overcome errors in parameter estimation and experimental variability. The adjusted infusion rate profile from the first session was used in the imaging session to replicate the target BrAC profile for each subject. This approach has been used to successfully achieve and maintain target BrACs, as verified by blood alcohol concentrations measured in samples drawn during the scan in other neuroimaging studies. After the end of the infusion, subjects were provided a meal, and BrAC was tracked until it dropped to 0.02 g/dL or below, at which time subjects were taken home by a designated driver or taxi.
Neuroimaging acquisition and preprocessing
During session 2, after the IV catheters were placed for alcohol infusion, participants were placed in a 3T SIEMENS Skyra MR scanner at the NMR Research Center at the NIH. Before starting the IV infusion of alcohol, a 5-min closed eyes resting-state fMRI scan was acquired with an echo-planar imaging sequence (36 axial slices, 3.8 mm thickness, 64 × 64 matrix and repetition time of 2000 ms, echo time 30, flip angle 90). After collecting this baseline resting-state fMRI scan, the alcohol infusion started and once the target BAC was achieved, a 10-minute waiting period was allowed to ensure the BAC was stable at the 0.08 g/dl level. During the waiting period, whole-brain structural and diffusion-weighted images of the brain were collected. Then, a second eyes-closed resting-state fMRI scan was collected while the target BAC (0.08 g/dl) was maintained. Following the MRI session, the Drug Effects Questionnaire was used to evaluate and quantify subjective effects of alcohol (DEQ).
CONN ver.17f (http://www.conn-toolbox.org), a MATLAB/SPM-based (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) software, was used to conduct spatial/temporal preprocessing and analyses. Spatial preprocessing included slice-timing correction, realignment, co-registration, normalization, and spatial smoothing (8 mm). Using the default settings in CONN, images were resliced into isotropic 2mm voxels. Anatomical volumes were segmented into grey matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) areas and the resulting masks were eroded to minimize partial volume effects. At the individual level, the temporal timeseries of the participant-specific six rotation-translation motion parameters and the timeseries from within the white matter/CSF masks were used as temporal covariates, and removed from the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) functional data using linear regression. The resulting residual BOLD timeseries were band-pass filtered (0.008Hz < f < 0.15Hz).
Neuroimaging analysis
To our knowledge there is no reported sub-division of human GPe with concrete landmark definition and/or Talairach coordinate demarcation. Therefore, for these analyses, we used right and left GPe masks obtained from the Lead-DBS toolbox (http://www.lead-dbs.org/). These anatomical masks were generated using manual tracing of several structural MRIs and subsequent co-registration with histological studies, and have a combined volume of approximately 929 mm3. Seed-based correlations were calculated as Fisher-transformed bivariate correlation coefficients between the BOLD activity timeseries in the seed ROI and each other individual voxel BOLD. CSF, grey matter, white matter signals and motion were included as covariates for this model at the single subject level. These correlations were calculated separately for the pre-infusion and post-infusion scans and for right and left GPe seeds. For each of the pre- and post-infusion analyses, 150 time points (across 300 seconds) were used.
To examine group level effects, the resulting single-subject connectivity maps were used as input for second level analyses in a general linear model. We modeled the within-subject effect of timepoint (i.e., post- versus pre-alcohol infusion; see S1 File, S1 Fig and S1 Table for report of the main effects of alcohol administration) and between-subject effects of impulsivity (BIS-11, UPPS-P, and DDT) and recent drinking behaviors (number of drinks in the last 30 days, number of heavy drinking days). S1 Table indicates clusters identified as showing significant changes from pre to post alcohol infusion, as well as associated statistics. For the seed-to-voxel analysis, reported clusters survived a height threshold of uncorrected p < 0.001 with a cluster level extent threshold of FDR-corrected p < 0.05. In Figs 3–5, these clusters are shown overlaid on structural brain cutaways. Corresponding line plots are only for visual interpretation of these effects. We also examined sex effects on alcohol-related changes in GPe connectivity at the whole brain level; there were no significant differences between males and females.
In order to test our hypothesis that the interaction between recent drinking behaviors and impulsivity would contribute to alcohol-induced changes in GPe functional connectivity, we extracted ROI-to-voxel correlation values between the seeds and significant clusters and used those values to conduct multiple regression analysis in R/RStudio (version 3.4.2/1.1.383). We modeled drinking history, impulsivity, and the interaction between the two as independent variables on the dependent variable of change in GPe connectivity. We conducted these analyses only for significant clusters identified in the seed-to-voxel analysis, and only for the significant drinking and impulsivity measures. For the drinking measures identified in that seed-to-voxel analysis, models (for the specific significant cluster only) included the significant drinking variable as well as one of the two significant impulsivity variables; thus, 2 regressions per cluster were run. Similarly, for significant impulsivity measures, 2 regressions per cluster were run (as there are two drinking variables). This resulted in a total of 20 tests. We then adjusted the omnibus test statistics to correct for multiple comparisons using FDR of < 0.05. Of those regressions, only those with significant interaction effects are reported.
Results
GPe connectivity and drinking behaviors
Neither the total number of drinks over 30 days nor the number of heavy drinking days were correlated with subjective effects of the alcohol infusion as measured by the DEQ. Table 2 shows the correlations between drinking and impulsivity measures.
Correlations between drinking and impulsivity measures.
Measure	Delay Discounting Rate (K)	TLFB: Heavy Drinking Days	TLFB: Drinks Per Thirty Days	UPPS-P: Positive Urgency	UPPS-P: Negative Urgency	UPPS-P: Perseverance	BIS: Attentional Impulsiveness	BIS: Motor Impulsiveness	BIS: Nonplanning Impulsiveness	 	TLFB: Heavy Drinking Days	-0.22	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	TLFB: Drinks Per Thirty Days	-0.33	0.79 ***	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	UPPS-P: Positive Urgency	0.07	0.27	0.30	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	UPPS-P: Negative Urgency	0.22	0.30	0.14	0.48 *	-	-	-	-	-	 	UPPS-P: Perseverance	0.06	-0.28	-0.22	0.06	0.46 *	-	-	-	-	 	BIS: Attentional Impulsiveness	0.11	0.29	0.15	0.36	0.42 *	0.13	-	-	-	 	BIS: Motor Impulsiveness	0.01	0.05	0.25	0.38	0.17	0.36	0.59 **	-	-	 	BIS: Nonplanning Impulsiveness	0.37	-0.07	-0.06	0.18	0.19	0.59 **	0.36	0.64 ***	-	 	BIS: Total	0.22	0.09	0.11	0.36	0.30	0.46 *	0.75 ***	0.89 ***	0.84 ***	 	
Abbreviations as follow: BIS- Barratt Impulsiveness Scale; TLFB- Alcohol Timeline Followback. Significance as follows-
*: p < 0.05;
**: p < 0.01;
***: p < 0.001
Number of drinks in 30 days
The number of drinks consumed per 30 days prior to screening was significantly associated with alcohol-related changes in connectivity (Fig 2 and Table 3). Drinks in past 30-days was negatively associated with alcohol-related changes in the connectivity between the left GPe and the left hippocampus /amygdala, left IFG extending into the anterior insula, and areas of the bilateral superior frontal / paracingulate cortices. Moreover, the interaction between this drinking measure and negative urgency as measured by the UPPS-P significantly predicted left GPe-hippocampus/amygdala connectivity (F(3,21) = 4.694, omnibus FDR-p = 0.028, adjusted R2 = 0.316, interaction B = -0.023, interaction p = 0.008; Fig 3). Drinks in past 30-days was also negatively associated with alcohol-induced change in connectivity between right GPe and bilateral putamen, Heschl’s gyrus, posterior insula, and central opercular cortices. For each of these associations, the change was such that in individuals with more past 30 days drinking, alcohol decreased connectivity; in individuals with less drinking, alcohol increased connectivity.
Association between past 30 day drinking and alcohol induced changes in GPe connectivity.
(As measured by the Alcohol Timeline Followback). Scatter plots correspond to individual connectivity at baseline in teal (estimated BAC: 0.0) and after infusion in salmon (BAC: 0.08); linear fit lines are also displayed for each timepoint. Connectivity coefficient is the r (correlation value) between the signal in the GPe seed and the coordinate indicated. Brain images represent whole effects of drinks in past 30 days on alcohol induced change in functional connectivity (post-infusion connectivity > pre-infusion connectivity). Warm colors indicate intoxication related increases in connectivity; cool colors indicated intoxication related decreases in connectivity. Images shown at p < 0.005. Clusters with significant interaction effects are reported in Fig 3. Reported clusters of connectivity with GPe area correspond to the following regions: A.i.—Superior Frontal Gyrus extending into dorsal anterior cingulate; A.ii.—Hippocampus/amygdala; B.i.—Heschl’s Gyrus extending into the insula/putamen; B.ii.—Heschl’s Gyrus extending into the insula/putamen.
Effect of alcohol induced changes in GPe connectivity on the association between drinking and impulsivity.
(As measured by the Alcohol Timeline Followback and UPPS-P, respectively). Cluster of Drinking Effect column: Brain images represent whole brain effects of drinks in past 30 days on alcohol induced change in functional connectivity (post-infusion connectivity > post-infusion connectivity). Warm colors indicate intoxication related increases in connectivity. Images shown at p < 0.005. Plots of Connectivity are scatter plots corresponding to individual connectivity at baseline in teal (estimated BAC: 0.0) and after infusion in salmon (BAC: 0.08); linear fit lines are also displayed for each timepoint. The y-axis for both plots is the same; the x-axis reflects the number of drinks in the last 30 days (center plot) and the number of drinks in the last 30 days multiplied by impulsivity score on the UPPS Negative Urgency scale (right plot). Abbreviations as follows: L. GPe- Left Globus Pallidus externus; Hipp./Amyg- Hippocampus/Amygdala cluster.
Associations between alcohol induced changes in GPe connectivity and drinking behaviors.
DRINKING BEHAVIOR CORRELATIONS		Peak	Cluster Size	T	p-FDR	p-FWE	Anatomical Labels	 	x	y	z	 	Timeline Followback									 	Right GPe x 30 day drinking (Negative correlation)	-42	-16	6	100	-6.04	0.023	0.014	Left Heschl’s Gyrus extending into the Insula, Central Operculum, Putamen	 	42	-20	10	83	-4.96	0.029	0.036	Right Heschl’s Gyrus into the Insula, Planum Temporale, Central/Parietal Operculum, Putamen	 	Right GPe x 30 day drinking (Positive correlation)	-12	18	-10	98	6.57	0.008	0.016	Left Subgenual Anterior Cingulate extending into the Accumbens	 	6	18	-12	75	6.56	0.015	0.057	Right Subgenual Anterior Cingulate extending into the Accumbens	 	Left GPe x 30 day drinking (Negative Correlation)	-2	50	20	142	-6.01	0.001	0.001	Superior Frontal Gyrus extending into dorsal anterior cingulate	 	-34	28	2	72	-6.01	0.042	0.062	Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (pars triangularus) extending into Insula / Frontal Operculum	 	-42	-8	-26	66	-6.14	0.042	0.089	Left Hippocampus / Amygdala	 	Right GPe x Heavy drinking days (Negative Correlation)	-36	-22	6	147	-6.08	0.001	0.001	Left Insula extending into Heschls Gyrus, Putamen, Pallidum, and Planum Temporale	 	
The number of drinks consumed in the past 30 days was positively associated with alcohol-induced changes in connectivity between the right GPe and the bilateral subgenual cingulate extending into the basal ganglia. The change was such that in individuals with more past 30 days drinking, alcohol increased connectivity; in individuals with less drinking, alcohol decreased connectivity.
Total number of heavy drinking days
The total number of heavy drinking days was associated negatively with changes in right GPe connectivity with a left insula cluster extending into Heschl’s gyrus, putamen, pallidum and planum temporale, such that there were no drinking pattern related differences in connectivity at baseline; however, in individuals with fewer heavy drinking days but not those with more, alcohol infusion increased connectivity (Fig 4 and Table 4).
Association between heavy drinking days and alcohol induced changes in GPe connectivity.
(As measured by the Alcohol Timeline Followback). Scatter plots correspond to individual connectivity at baseline in teal (estimated BAC: 0.0) and after infusion in salmon (BAC: 0.08); linear fit lines are also displayed for each timepoint. Connectivity coefficient is the r (correlation value) between the signal in the right GPe seed and the coordinate indicated. Brain images represent whole effects of drinks in past 30 days on alcohol induced change in functional connectivity (post-infusion connectivity > pre-infusion connectivity). Warm colors indicate intoxication related increases in connectivity; cool colors indicated intoxication related decreases in connectivity. Images shown at p < 0.005. Heavy Drinking Days as measured by the Alcohol Timeline Followback in the last 90 days. Abbreviations: R.GPe- Right Globus Pallidus Externus.
Associations between alcohol induced changes in GPe connectivity and impulsivity measures.
	Peak	Cluster Size	T	p-FDR	p-FWE	Anatomical Labels	 	x	y	z	 	Left GPe x UPPS -P Negative Urgency	26	-32	52	73	6.12	0.050	0.060	Right Postcentral Gyrus	 	Right GPe x BIS Total	0	-24	74	96	5.73	0.021	0.019	Precentral Gyrus (supplementary motor area)	 	
Clusters represent positive correlations between alcohol induced changes in connectivity and impulsivity measures; BIS: Barrett Impulsivity Scale; UPPS-P: Impulsivity Scale
GPe connectivity and impulsivity
Measures of impulsivity (BIS-11, UPPS-P, DDT) were not correlated with subjective effects of alcohol infusion as measured by the DEQ. Although we did examine both positive and negative associations, there were no significant negative associations between alcohol-induced GPe connectivity changes and impulsivity. There were also no significant positive associations between alcohol-induced GPe connectivity changes and DDT. Other findings reported below and in Table 4 and Fig 5.
Association between impulsivity measures and alcohol induced changes in GPe connectivity.
Scatter plots correspond to individual connectivity at baseline in teal (estimated BAC: 0.0) and after infusion in salmon (BAC: 0.08); linear fit lines are also displayed for each timepoint. Connectivity coefficient is the r (correlation value) between the signal in the GPe seed and the coordinate indicated. Brain images represent whole brain effects of drinks in past 30 days on alcohol induced change in functional connectivity (post-infusion connectivity > pre-infusion connectivity). Warm colors indicate intoxication related increases in connectivity. Images shown at p < 0.005. (left) Changes in connectivity plotted by total scores on the BIS (Barratt Impulsiveness Scale). (right) Changes in connectivity plotted scores on the UPPS-P negative urgency subscale. Reported clusters of connectivity with GPe area correspond to the following regions: (left) Precentral gyrus / SMA (supplementary motor area). Abbreviations: GPe- Globus Pallidus Externus; L.-Left; R.-Right.
BIS-11 trait impulsivity
We found a significant positive association between BIS-11 total score and alcohol -induced connectivity change of right GPe with the precentral gyrus. In other words, higher impulsivity score was associated with increased GPe functional connectivity while under the influence of alcohol; there was no association between impulsivity and connectivity with that cluster at baseline. Specific BIS sub-scores were not significantly related to change in connectivity.
UPPS-P trait impulsivity
Tendency to display impulsive behaviors under strong negative emotions, as measured by the UPPS-P negative urgency score, was significantly positively associated with alcohol-induced connectivity changes between the left GPe and right postcentral gyri. There was little association between impulsivity and connectivity under the influence of alcohol, but more impulsivity was associated with less connectivity at baseline.
Discussion
In this study, we examined the association between changes in GPe resting state connectivity following alcohol infusion with drinking history and impulsivity. Based on preclinical work finding alcohol alters neuronal firing in the GPe, and findings that the pathway is involved in response inhibition, we hypothesized that alcohol infusion would more greatly impact GPe functional connectivity in individuals with heavier drinking and more impulsivity. We also hypothesized that the interaction between recent drinking behaviors and impulsivity would contribute to alcohol-induced changes in GPe functional connectivity. We found reductions in connectivity between the GPe and some subregions of the brain following alcohol infusion in individuals with more drinking in the past 30 days and more heavy drinking days. However, impulsivity was related to greater GPe connectivity while intoxicated. Heavier recent drinking behaviors in combination with higher impulsivity were associated with greater alcohol-induced connectivity change between GPe and amygdala regions, but for most of our connectivity findings, the contribution of drinking and impulsivity were distinct. Together, our findings suggest that the relationship between GPe-related neuronal firing and alcohol-related impulsivity is more complicated than we previously anticipated.
As predicted, we found that heavier drinking individuals had pronounced changes in GPe connectivity with a frontal gyrus regions. In these regions, individuals with patterns of heavy drinking had more coupling at baseline than individuals with lighter drinking patterns; in the binge infusion state, this association between heavy drinking history and GPe connectivity reversed. The alcohol-induced reduction in GPe-frontal pathways in heavier drinkers, as opposed to increased coupling, may specifically reflect impairment of stop signaling. The inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) in particular has been demonstrated to control stop-signaling through the supplementary motor area, upstream from sub-cortical processes, possibly suggesting impaired behavioral inhibition or a shift towards reactive rather than proactive inhibition for individuals with more drinking. This pattern may also reflect an alcohol sensitization effect in heavier drinkers, consistent with sensitization effects seen for other drugs of abuse, particularly in basal ganglia regions. It is also notable that increased connectivity between the frontal gryus and the GPe at rest has also been seen in individuals with hepatic encephalopathy, a result of liver disease such as alcoholic cirrhosis. Our new findings may suggest these previously observed baseline differences reflect a pre-disease vulnerability in heavier drinkers, or indeed that the effects of alcohol even at a non-problem level on the liver contributes to damage to this pathway.
We also found that heavier drinking individuals had less change caused by alcohol infusion in connectivity between the GPe and dorsal ACC, superior frontal gyrus, and insula regions. In fact, while alcohol decreased GPe connectivity with these regions in individuals with more recent drinking, the effect was reverse for those with less drinking. These regions are thought to play a role in signaling unsuccessful stopping, particularly in cases where errors are less common. Intoxication-related changes in connectivity between this region and the GPe in individuals with less recent drinking may reflect novelty of failures in stop-signaling. Individuals who drink more may expect failures of stop-signaling during intoxication, as opposed to those with infrequent drinking. A lack of baseline association between recent drinks and error feedback in the right insula is consistent with lack of differences in expectation of low-frequency errors at baseline. Alternatively, during intoxication, less stop-signaling could correspond to less failures, leading to a reduced need for error signaling. However, there may be other explanations; the insula in particular is a heterogeneous structure involved in a variety of functions. For example, Feng and colleagues suggest reductions in spontaneous activity in this posterior insula structure reflect input of emotional state feedback during fear memory consolidation. From that perspective, one might interpret our results to mean that in individuals with less recent drinking, alcohol decreases the integration of emotional state feedback into behavior.
On the other hand, we found that alcohol increased subgenual ACC-GPe connectivity in individuals with more recent drinking. This pathway may be involved in reward-driven overrides of the stop-signal. Greater coupling of ACC-GPe at baseline may lead to a greater tendency to override the stop-signal in face of drinking; this would likely be more pronounced in individuals with positive experiences with alcohol, such as light social drinking, or from the rewarding nature of novelty. However, this override would be less necessary when the impulse control pathways are working sub-optimally and sending less stop-signals, such as during intoxication. Alcohol intoxication may also serve to reduce inhibition via increased connectivity to this override; our results may suggest alcohol has a reward heightening effect in individuals with more recent drinking but a dampening effect in lighter drinkers.
This fronto-striatal circuit has also been described as subserving development of cognitive and motor behavioral plans; an alternative explanation for our findings, then, given baseline decoupling in individuals with more recent drinking, could be a general deficit in action planning. However, it is difficult to determine if lower baseline GPe connectivity is caused by heavy drinking or if it is a vulnerability factor that leads to heavy drinking. It may be that individuals with lower GPe-ACC connectivity are more vulnerable to engaging in heavy drinking episodes. Another possibility is that drinking, even at a social level, has lasting effects on resting thresholds of GPe connectivity; for example, some work has shown that alcohol leads to hyperactive IFG response during stop-signaling. Future work should use longitudinal approaches to investigate risk factors and consequences of heavy and binge drinking across the lifespan.
We also found that heavier drinking individuals had greater decoupling caused by alcohol infusion in connectivity between the GPe and amygdala/hippocampus regions. The amygdala modulates striatum activity during reward learning and instrumental choice through direct connections within the limbic stream. Moreover, connectivity between the amygdala and basal ganglia is associated with greater stress-induced cortisol response dependent on the availability of mineralocorticoid receptors. Decoupling of the amygdala and GPe signaling during intoxication in heavier drinkers, particularly those with a tendency to act impulsively during negative emotions, may reflect drinking to reduce stress rather than drinking as a reward. This “drinking to reduce negative affect” is a key feature in addiction, and may mean that individuals with this pattern of response are particularly vulnerable to developing alcohol use disorder. In fact, chronic alcohol consumption leads to increased mineralocorticoid receptor pathway activity, suggesting that by drinking to reduce stress, these individuals may be making themselves more vulnerable to stress in the future.
Impulsivity across measures was associated with greater change in GPe connectivity following alcohol infusion. For clusters in the postcentral and precentral gyrus, individuals low on impulsivity had no differences in connectivity with the GPe as a result of alcohol. For the precentral/supplementary motor area(SMA) cluster, across the continuum of impulsive traits, there were no baseline differences in GPe connectivity, but after alcohol infusion, impulsivity was related to increased connectivity of these areas to the GPe. Previous work has shown that increased SMA-dorsal striatum structural connectivity was associated with more motor impulsivity, such that these results may suggest that individuals with trait impulsivity have an alcohol-related vulnerability to greater behavioral impulsivity. Alternatively, SMA engagement is associated with reactive inhibition and is thought to influence inhibition through a hyperdirect rather than indirect pathway. However, the highest instance of successful inhibition is when the hyperdirect and indirect pathways work in conjunction, meaning impulsive individuals with disproportional recruitment of the hyperdirect pathway, as seen here may still have impaired inhibition.
On the other hand, in the postcentral cluster, negative urgency was associated with hypoconnectivity to the GPe at baseline, but not when intoxicated. The postcentral gyrus is part of a motor cortical network activated during “go” signalling; it may be that individuals higher in impulsivity have a lower threshold for such a signal, reflected in the lower baseline value. If so, intoxication may compound the risk for impuslive behavior in these individuals. An alternative explanation is that individuals with higher negative urgency tend to engage in internal rumination more; the previous literature illustrates that decreases in activation in the postcentral gyrus at rest are more pronounced in interospective, eyes-closed conditions. Alcohol may then serve to normalize this self-focused dwelling on internal feelings in individuals higher in negative urgency.
Limitations
Because we did not have a placebo infusion condition, we cannot rule out that pre- to post-infusion changes were not due to dynamic fluctuations within resting states. However, we do not believe this is the case. A previous study using an alcohol infusion paradigm with a full, double-blind crossover design found alcohol effects on resting-state connectivity compared to placebo. Although that study examined network level connectivity changes rather than seed-based changes in subcortical regions as reported here, the fact that acute alcohol intoxication impacts connectivity during resting state has already been established. Moreover, this study is based on animal literature that found alcohol-induced changes in this pathway that are dose-dependent.
Our measures of impulsivity and drinking were primarily retrospective and obtained via self-report. Although we have designed our analysis to provide insight on the relationship between impulsivity, drinking, and alcohol-related changes in brain connectivity, we cannot comment on the directionality or causality of these relationships. Nonetheless, we did find evidence that connectivity during our laboratory “binge drinking” state was influenced by previous drinking and impulsive traits. Future studies should take a prospective approach that could speak directly to the neural mechanisms leading to problem drinking behaviors, as well as measuring within-subject changes in choice impulsivity during acute intoxication.
Another limitation to our inferences about baseline impulsivity and drinking measures is that our participants were light social drinkers with a limited range of alcohol use and an absence of AUD. This may explain why impulsivity and drinking measures were not significantly correlated in our sample, despite their clear link in the literature (e.g.,). Overall, our findings are most applicable to non-AUD binge drinking groups, such as adolescents and emerging adults, rather than in chronic heavy binge drinkers with AUD.
The small sample size of this study (n = 25) allowed us to test our specific hypotheses but may limit our ability to rule out the involvement of GPe connectivity to areas that were not found to be significant in this study. We limited our investigation to the connectivity of the hypothesized region of interest (GPe) and did not investigate other potential pathways of behavior control. Importantly, we do not assert that GPe pathways are the only mechanisms of control influenced by acute or chronic alcohol consumption or related to impulsivity. In fact, increased connectivity in behavioral control circuits suggests that alternative mechanisms or alternative recruitment of pathways are involved in failures of inhibition. Although outside the scope of the current study, future work should investigate those pathways during acute alcohol intoxication in a larger sample, and during specific stop-signaling tasks.
Because we do not have behavioral data on response inhibition in the alcohol intoxication state, there are other potential explanations for our findings. First, given that our study looked at resting-state connectivity differences, rather than actual differences in stop-signaling, it is possible that observed changes are not directly related to behavioral control. Abnormal frontostriatal connectivity has also been implicated in anhedonia and psychomotor retardation, mental time-keeping, cognitive load during working memory, set-shifting, and long-term reward learning. Changes in connectivity could also be driven by alcohol-related changes in neurotransmitter availability across the whole brain that may or may not translate directly to functional change; dopamine has been shown to modulate both resting and set-shifting based functional connectivity.
Conclusion
Here we translated preclinical research to investigate how alcohol-induced GPe connectivity disruptions explain impulsive behaviors and drinking patterns in social drinkers. We found that impulsivity and alcohol use are associated at rest with impairment of GPe circuits implicated in typical stop-signaling processing. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of an association between impulsivity, drinking measures, and GPe connectivity changes under clamped alcohol exposure in humans. These findings suggest that individuals with impulsive traits and past drinking are particularly vulnerable to the control impairments of alcohol intoxication. Moreover, they have important implications with regard to identifying those most at risk for drinking-related consequences; they suggest a mechanism for how alcohol leads to impulsive behaviors, including excessive drinking. Finally, the neuronal connectivity changes induced by alcohol may represent a target for interventions that would mitigate the impact of binge drinking or AUD by reducing impulsivity. Although additional work, including longitudinal studies, are needed before these findings can be useful in a clinical setting, this study achieves the important first step of translating preclinical models of binge drinking to the human brain and behavior.
Supporting information
References
Binge drinking: Health impact, prevalence, correlates and interventions
WHO WHO. Global status report on alcohol and health, 2014: World Health Organization; 2014.
Alcohol, adipose tissue and liver disease: mechanistic links and clinical considerations
Relationship of alcohol consumption to all-cause, cardiovascular, and cancer-related mortality in US adults
Impulsivity, frontal lobes and risk for addiction
Fractionating impulsivity: neuropsychiatric implications
Cognitive processes in alcohol binges: a review and research agenda
Vulnerability for alcohol use disorder and rate of alcohol consumption
Blunted ventral striatal responses to anticipated rewards foreshadow problematic drug use in novelty-seeking adolescents
Alcohol-induced impairment of inhibitory control is linked to attenuated brain responses in right fronto-temporal cortex
The connectome of the basal ganglia
Effective connectivity reveals important roles for both the hyperdirect (fronto-subthalamic) and the indirect (fronto-striatal-pallidal) fronto-basal ganglia pathways during response inhibition
Competing basal ganglia pathways determine the difference between stopping and deciding not to go
Cortical areas involved in behavioral expression of external pallidum dysfunctions: a PET imaging study in non-human primates
Canceling actions involves a race between basal ganglia pathways
A Pause-then-Cancel model of stopping: evidence from basal ganglia neurophysiology
Ethanol-sensitive pacemaker neurons in the mouse external globus pallidus
Alcohol affects neuronal substrates of response inhibition but not of perceptual processing of stimuli signalling a stop response

Reliability of a timeline method: assessing normal drinkers’ reports of recent drinking and a comparative evaluation across several populations

Measures of impulsivity in cigarette smokers and non-smokers
Delay or probability discounting in a model of impulsive behavior: effect of alcohol
Modulation of brain response to emotional images by alcohol cues in alcohol-dependent patients
A genetic determinant of the striatal dopamine response to alcohol in men
Plawecki M, DeCarlo R, Ramchandani V, O’Connor S, editors. Estimation of ethanol infusion profile to produce specified BrAC time course using physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models. The 26th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society; 2004: IEEE.
A physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for alcohol facilitates rapid BrAC clamping
PBPK modeling as a basis for achieving a steady BrAC of 60 +/- 5 mg% within ten minutes
A physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for alcohol facilitates rapid BrAC clamping
Why we like to drink: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study of the rewarding and anxiolytic effects of alcohol
The drug effects questionnaire: psychometric support across three drug types
Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks
BOLD fractional contribution to resting-state functional connectivity above 0.1 Hz
Toward defining deep brain stimulation targets in MNI space: A subcortical atlas based on multimodal MRI, histology and structural connectivity
Dorsal and ventral streams: the distinct role of striatal subregions in the acquisition and performance of goal-directed actions
Functional Connectivity Delineates Distinct Roles of the Inferior Frontal Cortex and Presupplementary Motor Area in Stop Signal Inhibition
A fronto–striato–subthalamic–pallidal network for goal-directed and habitual inhibition
THE NEURAL BASIS OF DRUG CRAVING—AN INCENTIVE-SENSITIZATION THEORY OF ADDICTION
Locomotor sensitization to ethanol impairs NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity in the nucleus accumbens and increases ethanol self-administration
Altered effective connectivity network of the basal ganglia in low-grade hepatic encephalopathy: a resting-state fMRI study with Granger causality analysis
Probability effects in the stop-signal paradigm: the insula and the significance of failed inhibition
Dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex: A Bottom-Up View
Altered resting-state brain activity at functional MRI during automatic memory consolidation of fear conditioning
Ramping ensemble activity in dorsal anterior cingulate neurons during persistent commitment to a decision
Medial Prefrontal and Subcortical Mechanisms Underlying the Acquisition of Motor and Cognitive Action Sequences in Humans
Blocking the mineralocorticoid receptor in humans prevents the stress-induced enhancement of centromedial amygdala connectivity with the dorsal striatum
Neurobiology of addiction: a neurocircuitry analysis
A relationship between the aldosterone–mineralocorticoid receptor pathway and alcohol drinking: preliminary translational findings across rats, monkeys and humans
Dissociable frontostriatal white matter connectivity underlies reward and motor impulsivity
Functional significance of the cortico–subthalamo–pallidal ‘hyperdirect’ pathway
Functional networks for cognitive control in a stop signal task: independent component analysis
Eyes open and eyes closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns
Effects of morphine and alcohol on functional brain connectivity during "resting state": A placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy young men
Delay discounting of money and alcohol in actively using alcoholics, currently abstinent alcoholics, and controls
Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of depression
Functional neural circuits for mental timekeeping
Altered frontostriatal coupling in pre-manifest Huntington’s disease: effects of increasing cognitive load
Dopamine depletion impairs frontostriatal functional connectivity during a set-shifting task
Baseline Frontostriatal-Limbic Connectivity Predicts Reward-Based Memory Formation
L-Dopa Modulates Functional Connectivity in Striatal Cognitive and Motor Networks: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Study
10.1371/journal.pone.0224906.r001
Decision Letter 0
Pattij
Tommy
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
 10 Jan 2020 
PONE-D-19-29169
Alcohol Effects on Globus Pallidus Connectivity: Role of Impulsivity and Binge Drinking
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Momenan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses all the points raised during the review process.
In particular, regarding the statistical analyses and presentation of the data: 1) present effect sizes in the results section and include analyses on gender effects as suggested by reviewer 1 and 2) use more conservative cluster-forming thresholds and be more specific and complete in the description of the employed analyses as suggested by reviewer 2.
In addition, the GPe as region of interest should be more clearly motivated as suggested by reviewer 1, and the discrepancy between the discussion of behavioural data and the absence thereof in the results section should be addressed.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Feb 24 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tommy Pattij, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Our internal editors have looked over your manuscript and determined that it may be within the scope of our Neuroscience of Reward and Decision Making Call for Papers. This collection of papers is headed by a team of Guest Editors for PLOS ONE: Stephanie Groman, Satoshi Ikemoto, Jane Taylor and Robert Whelan. With this Collection we hope to bring together researchers working on a wide range of disciplines, from animal subjects research, computational approaches and patient-centered research. Additional information can be found on our announcement page: https://collections.plos.org/s/reward-and-decision-making. If you would like your manuscript to be considered for this collection, please let us know in your cover letter and we will ensure that your paper is treated as if you were responding to this call. Agreeing to be part of the call-for-papers will not affect the date your manuscript is published. If you would prefer to remove your manuscript from collection consideration, please specify this in the cover letter.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This is an interesting and relevant study that focus on the harm caused by binge drinking in young men and women. To better understand the neural mechanisms leading to risky and disinhibited intoxication-related behaviors the authors tested twenty-five healthy volunteers who underwent intravenous alcohol infusion to achieve a blood alcohol level of 0.08 g/dl. A resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging scan was collected prior to the infusion and at binge-level exposure. The authors were in particular interested in assessing alcohol-induced changes in globus pallidus externus (GPe) connectivity in relation to drinking behaviors and impulsivity traits. The authors found that subjects with greater number of drinks in the recent past had greater alcohol-induced deficits in the connectivity of GPe particularly to the striatum; impulsivity was related to greater GPe connectivity while intoxicated.
Overall this is a well written paper. However, I have some concerns, which are listed below:
One of the main problems of this study is the relatively small sample size for the number of analyses performed. The authors may provide effect sizes for their significant results. Sex effects were not explored although half of the participants were women. The menstrual cycle can have an influence on the metabolization of alcohol and although it was recorded in the study, it is not noted if it was controlled for or considered in the data analyses. The targeted blood alcohol level of 0.08 g/dl may have different effects on neurofunctional connectivity in men and women depending on individual alcohol tolerance levels. Nicotine consumption should also be used as a co-variate. The methods are well described; however, it is not clear why the authors focused on the globus pallidus externus (GPe) and did not use other seed regions involved in inhibitory control as well. No behavioral performance data are presented, yet the authors extensively discuss the stop-signal task along the lines of “reduced behavioral inhibition” or “reactive rather than proactive inhibition for individuals with more drinking.” Either the discussion needs to be reformulated or performance data should be added to the analyses. The list of limitations of the study is long including not having a placebo group and a small sample size. However, because of the complexity of the results, the introduction and discussion would profit from a model that can integrate the different connectivity results and also provide a rationale for focusing on the GPe as seed region for the analyses.
Reviewer #2: “Alcohol effects on globus pallidus connectivity: role of impulsivity and binge drinking” by Dr. Fede and colleagues describes (clamped) alcohol-induced alterations in resting-state connectivity of the globus pallidus externus (GPe) with other regions, and how that relates to recent drinking history and impulsivity traits/behavior. This well-written manuscript is interesting and timely. The most major critique relates to the cluster-forming threshold chosen. A few points could be clarified with greater detail, elaborated below.
Major
Line 215: A cluster-forming threshold of p<.005, pFDR<.05 is rather liberal (Eklund et al. 2016), with cluster-forming thresholds of p<.001 producing much more acceptable false-positive rates. Unless there is a rationale for using a more liberal threshold with these connectivity data, the p<.001 threshold should be followed.
Lines 220-231: If I follow, the authors performed paired t-tests (pre, post) with no regressors, then paired-t tests with impulsivity and drinking regressors. These clusters’ beta weights were then extracted and used as the outcome of a linear model conducted in R(?) Please clarify. Be very explicit about exactly how the analyses were performed, with a helpful step-by-step description in more depth. This section was a bit hard to follow.
Line 343: “As predicted, we found that heavier drinking individuals had more pronounced changes in GPe connectivity with the basal ganglia, OFC, and mPFC regions. In these regions, individuals with patterns of heavy drinking had less coupling at baseline than individuals with lighter drinking patterns;” Figure 2 (upper right) appears to illustrate the heaviest drinkers with more coupling at baseline (r= ~.25) relative to the lightest drinkers (r= ~0) in the R.GPe-L insula/putamen, with the lighter drinkers showing the largest alcohol-induced change in connectivity. Please clarify
Minor
Line 56: “This is largely due to organ damage caused by chronic drinking, intoxication-related car accidents and domestic violence, and the development of alcohol use disorder (AUD) [3, 4].” AUD is antecedent to the vast majority of the ills described here; please clarify this relationship.
Table 1: Though it is specified in-text, it would be helpful to discriminate the two TLFB measures; either in the table Notes or within the table, e.g., “Drinks in last Thirty Days”.
Line 133: What monetary amounts were used for the DDT?
Supplementary Figure 1A: Perhaps I misunderstand, but the way this is presented it appears to show a (group mean?) time series from the right GPe OFF and ON alcohol. If so, then the stereotyped pattern from the (pre) condition resting scan is replicated in a (post) resting scan 25 min later, albeit with a small timeshift. It seems impossible that a resting scan would produce a stereotyped/replicated pattern as illustrated; i.e. I would expect that the group mean resting BOLD signal would look like noise. Please explain what this figure is showing.
Interestingly, alcohol-increased connectivity was mostly ipsilateral for left GPe, but mostly contralateral for right GPe. What do the authors make of this?
Line 239: “The number of drinks consumed per 30 days prior to screening had a significant effect on alcohol-related change in connectivity.” Please reword to reflect “association”; the current wording implies directionality and causation.
Figure 2 legend: “B.i. Heschl’s Gyrus…” appears to be labeled “ii.” on the figure diagram.
Figure 3 legend: “Reported clusters clusters of connectivity with GPe area correspond to the following regions: i. – Orbitofrontal cortex extending into subgenual anterior cingulate; ii. – Angular/supramarginal gyrus; iii. Frontal pole.” It seems that “GPe area” should be described as “left GPe”. No mention is made of “iv”, “v”, or “vi”.
Figure 5: “Diagram of Drinking/Impulsivity Mediation column” is not present in the attached figures. Only 3 columns are displayed in Fig 5.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0224906.r002
Author response to Decision Letter 0
 4 Feb 2020 
Reviewer #1: 
1) One of the main problems of this study is the relatively small sample size for the number of analyses performed. The authors may provide effect sizes for their significant results.
Response: We have added T-values to Tables 3 & 4 and report adjusted R2 for the regression analysis.
2) Sex effects were not explored although half of the participants were women. The menstrual cycle can have an influence on the metabolization of alcohol and although it was recorded in the study, it is not noted if it was controlled for or considered in the data analyses. The targeted blood alcohol level of 0.08 g/dl may have different effects on neurofunctional connectivity in men and women depending on individual alcohol tolerance levels.
Response: We ran a supplementary analysis to address this concern and noted the lack of sex effects in the manuscript as follows (page 10): “We also examined sex effects on alcohol-related changes in GPe connectivity at the whole brain level; there were no significant differences between males and females.”
3) Nicotine consumption should also be used as a co-variate. 
Response: There was only one participant in our study who reported smoking (as indicated in Table 1). Therefore, we cannot covary nicotine consumption, but we do not expect it influences our results.
4) The methods are well described; however, it is not clear why the authors focused on the globus pallidus externus (GPe) and did not use other seed regions involved in inhibitory control as well. 
Response: We focus on the GPe because our study was designed to translate the preclinical findings of Abrahao et al., 2017, which found that acute alcohol administration increased the firing rate of neurons in the GPe that project efferently. Based on this, we had reason to hypothesize that alcohol administration would alter GPe functional connectivity. This is described in the introduction (pages 3-4) and further, we have added the following language to emphasize this: “In this study, we aimed to extend the preclinical results of the Abrahao et al, 2017 study to a human paradigm by…”
5) No behavioral performance data are presented, yet the authors extensively discuss the stop-signal task along the lines of “reduced behavioral inhibition” or “reactive rather than proactive inhibition for individuals with more drinking.” Either the discussion needs to be reformulated or performance data should be added to the analyses. 
Response: As explained in our response to comment #4, the aims of our analyses were to test in a human model alcohol-related changes in GPe pathways. These pathways are theorized to be involved in response inhibition/stop-signaling (e.g., Jahfari et al., 2011). Moreover, based on previous literature (i.e., Nikolaou et al., 2013) we know that alcohol impairs GPe function during stop-signaling. Although we do not have data on changes in stop-signal neural response during intoxication (which we acknowledge in the limitations on page 20), a large portion of our analysis focused on behavioral impulsivity and trait impulsivity measures. We, therefore feel the stop-signaling/response inhibition oriented discussion of our results is the best explanation of our findings in the context of the prior literature. We do, however, acknowledge that there may be other ways to interpret our findings (page 20).
6) The list of limitations of the study is long including not having a placebo group and a small sample size. However, because of the complexity of the results, the introduction and discussion would profit from a model that can integrate the different connectivity results and also provide a rationale for focusing on the GPe as seed region for the analyses.
Response: In concurrence with this Reviewer’s other concerns, we have emphasized our motivation to translate the results of a mouse-model published in Abrahao et al. 2017 vis the framework of approaching alcohol-related GPe signaling in the context of the indirect pathway of response inhibition. We believe this framework effectively integrates the results. We have added the following language to the first paragraph of the discussion to further emphasize this as follows (page 15): “Based on preclinical work finding alcohol alters neuronal firing in the GPe, and findings that the pathway is involved in response inhibition, we hypothesized that…”
Reviewer #2: 
Major
1) Line 215: A cluster-forming threshold of p<5, pFDR<.05 is rather liberal (Eklund et al. 2016), with cluster-forming thresholds of p<.001 producing much more acceptable false-positive rates. Unless there is a rationale for using a more liberal threshold with these connectivity data, the p<.001 threshold should be followed.
Response: We have updated our analysis to use the p<.001 cluster forming threshold per the reviewer’s recommendation. The results, discussion, table, figures, and supplementary materials have been updated accordingly. 
2) Lines 220-231: If I follow, the authors performed paired t-tests (pre, post) with no regressors, then paired-t tests with impulsivity and drinking regressors. These clusters’ beta weights were then extracted and used as the outcome of a linear model conducted in R(?) Please clarify. Be very explicit about exactly how the analyses were performed, with a helpful step-by-step description in more depth. This section was a bit hard to follow.
Response: We have updated our methods to more clearly describe the Conn first and second-level processing pipeline, and our process in extracting the correlation values for use investigating the interaction between drinking history and impulsivity in the regression model in R. (pages 9/10)
3) Line 343: “As predicted, we found that heavier drinking individuals had more pronounced changes in GPe connectivity with the basal ganglia, OFC, and mPFC regions. In these regions, individuals with patterns of heavy drinking had less coupling at baseline than individuals with lighter drinking patterns;” Figure 2 (upper right) appears to illustrate the heaviest drinkers with more coupling at baseline (r= ~.25) relative to the lightest drinkers (r= ~0) in the R.GPe-L insula/putamen, with the lighter drinkers showing the largest alcohol-induced change in connectivity. Please clarify
Response: We thank the reviewer for pointing out this inconsistency. We have revised the discussion somewhat based on our updated results, and have paid particular attention to making sure this paragraph (now page 16) more accurately reflects the findings.
Minor
4) Line 56: “This is largely due to organ damage caused by chronic drinking, intoxication-related car accidents and domestic violence, and the development of alcohol use disorder (AUD) [3, 4].” AUD is antecedent to the vast majority of the ills described here; please clarify this relationship.
Response: We have rephrased the sentence as follows: “This is largely due to the development of alcohol use disorder (AUD) and consequential organ damage caused by chronic drinking, intoxication-related car accidents and domestic violence [3, 4].”
5) Table 1: Though it is specified in-text, it would be helpful to discriminate the two TLFB measures; either in the table Notes or within the table, e.g., “Drinks in last Thirty Days”.
Response: We have added the following to the Table 1 Note: “Heavy drinking days was calculated from the last 90 days as measured by the TLFB, where a heavy drinking day was defined as 4 or more drinks per day for women and 5 or more drinks per day for men. Drinks per thirty days was the total count of drinks from the past 30 days as measured by the TLFB.”
6) Line 133: What monetary amounts were used for the DDT? 
Response: We have added the following to the description of the DDT (page 6): “Subjects were presented as their immediate reward values between $100 and $0 dollars in increments of $10, while the delayed reward was $100. Delays were 0, 7, 14, 20, 25, or 30 days. Subjects completed trials with all iterations of these parameters.”
7) Supplementary Figure 1A: Perhaps I misunderstand, but the way this is presented it appears to show a (group mean?) time series from the right GPe OFF and ON alcohol. If so, then the stereotyped pattern from the (pre) condition resting scan is replicated in a (post) resting scan 25 min later, albeit with a small timeshift. It seems impossible that a resting scan would produce a stereotyped/replicated pattern as illustrated; i.e. I would expect that the group mean resting BOLD signal would look like noise. Please explain what this figure is showing.
Response: This is in fact the time series of the first 50 time points of the resting state scan in the ON and OFF alcohol conditions This time series is averaged across voxels in the seed region of interest (right GPe) and across subjects. This time series is also post-preprocessing, so noise reduction steps have already been carried out as reflected in this time course. We have added the following description to the caption of the supplementary figure as follows: “Shows the first 50 time points of the timeseries of the preprocessed BOLD signal from the right GPe (averaged across voxels within the right GPe and across subjects…”
8) Interestingly, alcohol-increased connectivity was mostly ipsilateral for left GPe, but mostly contralateral for right GPe. What do the authors make of this?
Response: We have added this discussion to the supplementary materials: “Alcohol has previously been shown to reduce the lateralization of specific functions, particularly in terms of greater left lateral increases and right lateral decreases in connectivity at rest (Volkow et al., 2008). The greater left-side increases in connectivity (both from ipsi- and contralateral GPe regions) may reflect this pattern as well. We would point out that there were mostly contralateral alcohol-decreases in connectivity from the left GPe, suggesting reductions in connectivity on the right side. We would also point out from the perspective of the role of the GPe pathways, previous work finds that connectivity strength in right-lateralized hyperdirect and indirect basal ganglia/frontal pathways predicted successful response inhibition (Jahfari et al., 2011). On the other hand, increases in left ipsilateral connectivity in individuals with chronic alcohol use has been associated with compensatory function (Chanraud et al., 2011). Taken together, the lateralization pattern may reflect alcohol related impairment of standard inhibitory pathways and increases in “alternative” neural communication routes.” 
9) Line 239: “The number of drinks consumed per 30 days prior to screening had a significant effect on alcohol-related change in connectivity.” Please reword to reflect “association”; the current wording implies directionality and causation.
Response: We have reworded this to: “The number of drinks consumed per 30 days prior to screening was significantly associated with alcohol-related changes in connectivity.”
10) Figure 2 legend: “B.i. Heschl’s Gyrus…” appears to be labeled “ii.” on the figure diagram.
Response: We have corrected this to be labeled “i.” on the diagram.
11) Figure 3 legend: “Reported clusters clusters of connectivity with GPe area correspond to the following regions: i. – Orbitofrontal cortex extending into subgenual anterior cingulate; ii. – Angular/supramarginal gyrus; iii. Frontal pole.” It seems that “GPe area” should be described as “left GPe”. No mention is made of “iv”, “v”, or “vi”.
Response: We have updated the figure legend to correspond to the updated results based on requested revisions; as such, Figure 3 is now Figure 4. Figure 4 and its legend no longer refer to roman numerals, and we have specified the laterality of the GPe seed.
12) Figure 5: “Diagram of Drinking/Impulsivity Mediation column” is not present in the attached figures. Only 3 columns are displayed in Fig 5.
Response: We have corrected this error by updating the note to reflect the current version of the figure. Note that the order of the figures has been updated based on the requested revisions and Fig 5. Is now Fig. 3.
10.1371/journal.pone.0224906.r003
Decision Letter 1
Pattij
Tommy
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
 19 Feb 2020 
PONE-D-19-29169R1
Alcohol Effects on Globus Pallidus Connectivity: Role of Impulsivity and Binge Drinking
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Momenan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Both reviewers indicated that all points have been carefully addressed in the revised version. A residual point that needs to be addressed in the discussion section is the interpretation of reduced behavioral inhibition in changed GPe pathway functioning in individuals with more drinking. I agree with reviewer 2, that without the support of behavioral data in the current data set, this interpretation indeed should be toned down.
We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Apr 04 2020 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tommy Pattij, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors did a good job in addressing most of my concerns. Without behavioral measurements, the data of this study are not supporting the discussion that changes in GPe pathways in individuals with more drinking are associated with reduced behavioral inhibition. The response of the authors that they were testing alcohol-related changes in GPe pathways in a human model should have enabled them to apply a response inhibition task, if that was one of the main hypothesis of the study. This part of the discussion needs to be toned down or clearly noted as a limitation of the study.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0224906.r004
Author response to Decision Letter 1
 25 Feb 2020 
We believe that in this revision of discussion our interpretation of reduced behavioral inhibition is softened. As such, we have added alternative mechanisms that may explain our findings throughout the Discussion section. We have also added to the last paragraph of the limitations section (line 452/453) as follows: “Because we do not have behavioral data on response inhibition in the alcohol intoxication state, there are other potential explanations for our findings.”
We hope the manuscript in its revised form merits publication in PLOS ONE.
10.1371/journal.pone.0224906.r005
Decision Letter 2
Pattij
Tommy
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
 4 Mar 2020 
Alcohol Effects on Globus Pallidus Connectivity: Role of Impulsivity and Binge Drinking
PONE-D-19-29169R2
Dear Dr. Momenan,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it complies with all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you will receive an e-mail containing information on the amendments required prior to publication. When all required modifications have been addressed, you will receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will proceed to our production department and be scheduled for publication.
Shortly after the formal acceptance letter is sent, an invoice for payment will follow. To ensure an efficient production and billing process, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, you must inform our press team as soon as possible and no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
With kind regards,
Tommy Pattij, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0224906.r006
Acceptance letter
Pattij
Tommy
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
 6 Mar 2020 
PONE-D-19-29169R2 
Alcohol Effects on Globus Pallidus Connectivity: Role of Impulsivity and Binge Drinking 
Dear Dr. Momenan:
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximize its impact. If they will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
For any other questions or concerns, please email plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE.
With kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Tommy Pattij 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
