Salience network coupling is linked to both tobacco smoking and symptoms of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
Introduction
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptoms, even those below diagnostic threshold, enhance the likelihood of nicotine dependence, suggesting a neurobiological link between disorders. Of particular interest is the salience network (SN), which mediates attention to salient internal/external stimuli to guide behavior and is anchored by the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and bilateral anterior insula (AI). Disrupted interactions between the SN and the default mode (DMN) and central executive networks (CEN) have been noted in both ADHD and nicotine dependence. Further, enhanced intra-SN coupling between the dACC-AI influences aspects of nicotine dependence such as reactivity to smoking cues.
Methods
To identify links between SN functional connectivity and ADHD symptoms in nicotine dependence, we compared 21 nicotine dependent individuals with 17 non-smokers on ADHD symptoms as measured by the ADHD self-report scale (ASRS) and resting state intra and inter-SN functional connectivity.
Results
Relative to healthy controls, nicotine dependent individuals had significantly higher ASRS scores and greater dACC-AI coupling. No group differences were noted on inter-SN network coupling. A significant association was found between ASRS and dACC-AI coupling both in the entire cohort and specifically when evaluating nicotine dependent individuals alone.
Conclusions
The greater ASRS scores in nicotine dependent individuals is in line with existent literature and the stronger dACC-AI coupling in smokers further supports the role of this network in nicotine dependence. The significant association between dACC-AI coupling and ASRS suggests that intra-SN coupling strength may impact neurocognitive functioning associated with both ADHD symptoms and nicotine dependence.
Introduction
Smoking rates are significantly higher in those with psychiatric disorders, accounting for 40% of all cigarettes smoked. For example, the rates of smoking are almost two-fold greater in those with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) relative to psychiatrically healthy individuals. In fact, the risk for smoking and earlier initiation of nicotine use is associated with ADHD symptoms, even when these symptoms are below the threshold for clinical diagnosis. Links between ADHD symptoms and nicotine dependence raise the possibility of shared neurobiological underpinnings between the disorders. One potential area of linkage may be disruptions of the salience network (SN), which is anchored by the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and bilateral anterior insula (AI). Generally, the SN is thought to integrate internal and extrapersonal information to guide behavior, which is relevant in nicotine dependence, given the influence of salient internal (subjective feelings of craving, withdrawal) and external stimuli (smoking-related cues) on the motivation to smoke. The SN’s role in focusing attention and guiding behavior also fits with the hallmark symptoms of ADHD including inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity (NIMH, 2017).
Salience network involvement in both disorders is supported by a wealth of information linking the primary nodes of this network with both ADHD and nicotine dependence. Specifically, the dACC strongly contributes to the pathophysiology of ADHD (for review see:). Those with ADHD also have greater insula reactivity during affective processing and show insula and dACC hypo-activity during inhibitory tasks. Insula function also plays a key role in nicotine use in human (Dias et al., 2006), and rodent models (; Pushparaj et al., 2013), while dACC function and neurochemistry has been linked to difficulty ignoring smoking cues. In terms of functional connectivity, ADHD and smoking withdrawal impacts the resource allocation index (RAI), which is a measure of SN-centered interactions with the executive control and default mode networks (ECN, DMN). Specifically, relative to healthy adolescents, those with ADHD show reduced RAI scores and decreased SN-ECN connectivity, suggesting that reduced communication between the SN and networks such as the ECN may contribute to ADHD. Evaluating SN relationships with both the ECN and DMN by evaluating RAI is critical given evidence that the SN facilitates switching between ECN and DMN dominated states allowing for effective cognition. Connectivity within the SN, between the dACC and dorsal anterior insula, also plays a role in nicotine dependence, as connectivity strength between these regions is associated with reactivity to smoking cues and severity of nicotine dependence. However, recent work showed that dACC-insula connectivity strength was not predictive of smoking relapse when controlling for baseline smoking calling into question the specific role of dACC-AI coupling in nicotine dependence.
To address the SN’s role in nicotine dependence, and links with ADHD, we compared nicotine dependent individuals and healthy controls on intra- and inter- SN connectivity using RAI scores and dACC-AI coupling respectively. For inter-SN connectivity we focused on the bilateral dorsal anterior insula given our prior work indicating this subregion’s connectivity with the dACC was associated with smoking cue-reactivity. To evaluate ADHD symptoms, scores on the ADHD self-report scale (ASRS) were compared between groups and the relationship between the ASRS and SN connectivity measures were assessed. The ASRS was chosen as this is a validated measure that has been successfully implemented in substance abusing populations. While a score of 4 or higher on the ASRS is consistent with ADHD symptoms status, this metric allows for the assessment of ADHD symptoms ranging above and below threshold, which is critical given the link between ADHD symptoms and the development of nicotine dependence. Based on the existent literature discussed above we expect nicotine dependent individuals to show greater ADHD symptoms and enhanced intra-SN connectivity and reduced RAI scores.
Methods
Seventeen healthy controls (8 women, 9 men) and 21 nicotine dependent individuals (6 women, 15 men) were enrolled from a smoking cessation clinical trial (MGH; NCT01480232). Smokers met DSM-IV criteria for current nicotine dependence, reported smoking ≥5 cigarettes per day within the last six months and had expired air carbon monoxide (CO) ≥10ppm at screening (Bedfont Micro IV Smokerlyzer, Bedfont Scientific, Kent, England). Participants were excluded for current unstable medical illness, substance-use disorder other than nicotine in the prior 6 months, positive ten-panel urine screen for recent use of addictive drugs (Medimpex United Inc.), current major depressive disorder, lifetime diagnosis of bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, self-reported use of psychotropic medications, or positive pregnancy test. This study was approved by the Partners Human Subjects Committee. All participants were consented and compensated.
Assessments
Baseline smoking behavior was characterized by measuring expiratory CO levels, urine cotinine levels, and assessing pack-years of tobacco smoking, and severity of nicotine dependence (Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND); Heatherton et al., 1991) and craving (Tiffany Questionnaire of Smoking Urges (TQSU). The ASRS was evaluated during the screening visit approximately 1–2 weeks before the scanning visit.
Acquisition of Neuroimaging Data
All smokers were permitted to smoke prior to the scan to minimize withdrawal and scanning occurred approximately 1–1.5 hours after the last cigarette. They were scanned using a 3 T Siemens (Erlangen, Germany) Skyra scanner with a 32-channel head coil at the Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging. Whole-brain T1-weighted 1 mm isotropic structural scans were collected using a 3D multiecho MPRAGE sequence (176 sagittal slices, 256 mm FoV, TR 2530 ms, TI 1200 ms, 2x GRAPPA acceleration, TE 1.64/3.5/5.36/7.22 ms). Functional scans were collected using a 2D gradient echo EPI sequence (31 slices, 3 mm thick, 0.6 mm gap, TR 3 s, TE 30 ms).
Resting State Analysis
Functional MRI analysis was implemented using software from the fMRI of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library (FSL: www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl). Data were pre-processed using motion correction with MCFLIRT, brain extraction using BET, slice timing correction, spatial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel of full-with half-maximum 6mm, and high-pass temporal filtering with Gaussian weighted least squares straight-line fitting with σ =100s. Functional MRI data were registered to the MNI 152 standard space template with a 2 × 2 ×2 resolution.
To prevent motion and other sources of noise from influencing the resting state connectivity measures, each subject’s data were denoised using FSL’s multivariate exploratory linear decomposition into independent components (MELODIC). The time courses of all independent components (ICs) were visually inspected and those representing noise were identified and regressed out. After this de-noising, but prior to resting state analysis, we performed dynamic global signal regression (dGSR) on each subject’s data to remove blood-borne systemic low frequency noise. dGSR regresses out systemic noise which can lead to inflated (or spurious) correlations between brain regions after correcting for blood arrival time in each voxel. This significantly reduces spurious correlations between regions without generating the spurious negative correlations which necessarily arise from standard (or static) global signal regression.
Time courses for the dACC and AI regions-of-interest (ROIs) were extracted from the denoised resting state data following dGSR. The bilateral AI ROI was used in our prior work assessing dACC-AI coupling and was comprised of two 5-mm spheres located at MNI coordinates (x = ± 34, y = 26, z = 2). While there are other insula subregions, the anterior insula is functionally connected with the dACC while mid/posterior insula regions are functionally connected with more posterior regions of the cingulate. Furthermore, connectivity between this specific insula subregion and the dACC showed an association with brain reactivity to smoking cues while the connectivity of other insula regions to the dACC did not. The dACC ROI also has been used to evaluate dACC-AI coupling and was comprised of two 5-mm spheres located at MNI coordinates (0,32,20) and (0,24,26). The ROIs for the SN, ECN, and DMN were taken from. The average time course for each ROI were demeaned, detrended, Hamming windowed (, page 242) and correlated resulting in one correlation value (r) per individual. Maximal correlation values were calculated allowing for a possible time lag between signals, thus allowing for the detection of correlated yet temporally offset signals. This differs from the Pearson correlation approach that calculates relationships with a zero-time delay between signals, which may miss identifying true associations. To calculate RAI, correlations were calculated between the SN-DMN and SN-ECN. These values were then z transformed and RAI was calculated by: RAI = (SN, ECN coupling) - (SN, DMN coupling,). Since the ECN separates into a right and left lateralized network two RAI scores were calculated involving the right or left ECN individually.
Results
Demographics
Smokers and non-smokers did not differ in age (p = 0.4) or education level (p = 0.1) but did differ on expired CO (p < 0.001). See Table 1 for demographic information.
Brain Coupling
There were no group differences in RAI when considering either RAI scores incorporating the right (p = 0.84) or left lateralized (p = 0.68) ECN along with the SN and DMN. Smokers had significantly greater dACC-AI coupling relative to healthy controls (smokers: 0.53 ± 0.175, healthy controls: 0.33 ± 0.30, p = 0.013, Figure 1), a finding that was still significant when Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons accounting for the three total measures of intra-and inter-SN coupling. Given the significant group difference in inter-SN coupling, subsequent analyses focused on dACC-AI coupling and not RAI scores.
ASRS
In comparison to healthy controls, smokers reported more ADHD symptoms as indicated by greater ASRS score (smokers: 2.8 ± 1.8; healthy controls: 0.71 ± 1.3, p < 0.001). Specifically, 90% of smokers reported at least one symptom on the ASRS, with 47.6% reporting a score of 4 or greater. In comparison, 25% of healthy controls reported at least one symptom on the ASRS and only one non-smoker reported a score of 4.
ASRS and Intra-SN Coupling
Independently evaluating groups showed that this correlation was significant in smokers (r = 0.58, p < 0.01, Figure 2) but not healthy controls (r = 0.24, p = 0.35). The lack of a stronger association between ASRS and intra-SN coupling in healthy controls appears to be driven by a floor effect in ADHD symptoms for the non-smoking cohort.
dACC-insula coupling and ASRS showed no association with FTND (r=0.21, p=0.6, r = 0.05, p = 0.84 respectively), pack-year (r = −0.26, p = 0.26, r = −0.22, 0.34) or cigarettes smoked per day as reported over the last week (r = −0.11, p 0.6, r = − 0.06, p = 0.8). Given the prior report showing dACC-AI coupling is associated with the number of cigarettes smoked in the last 60 days, this value was estimated based on the 7-day self-report and no significant relationship was found between intra-SN coupling and 60-day cigarette use (r = −0.28, p = 0.2).
Discussion
The SN, along with networks such as the ECN and DMN are implicated across neuropsychiatric disorders. The current findings fit within this framework as smokers, relative to controls, showed significantly greater intra-SN connectivity. Somewhat surprisingly, there were no group differences in RAI score, which is a measure of SN interactions with the DMN and ECN, indicating that inter-network interactions did not differ based on smoking status. This lack of difference may be due to nicotine dependent individuals being allowed to smoke prior to scanning (~1–1.5 prior), as others reported that RAI is higher in sated vs. overnight abstinent smokers, suggesting that nicotine abstinence may reveal additional group differences. In relation to dACC-AI coupling, our prior work showed that coupling strength in smokers was not influenced by exposure to smoking cues or following an hour delay since smoking, suggesting that dACC-AI strength is stable during early abstinence. The idea that acute changes in nicotine do not influence intra-SN connectivity is supported by who showed no change in intra-SN coupling strength following nicotine administration. Whether dACC-AI connectivity changes over longer-term abstinence is still unclear. However, the prior literature showing dACC-AI stability suggests that intra-SN connectivity may be a trait difference between smokers and non-smokers. Collectively, our findings indicate that intra- but not inter-SN connectivity differs between non-smokers and smokers who recently smoked.
The present work also found group differences in ASRS scores, with nicotine dependent individuals reporting significantly greater ADHD symptoms during their screening visit following smoking as usual. These symptoms positively correlate with dACC-AI coupling strength suggesting that intra-SN communication may contribute to these symptoms. This association was significant in the nicotine dependent group. It is likely that the low level of ADHD symptoms in the non-smokers diminished the ability to see an association in this group alone, and assessing non-smokers with more pronounced ADHD symptoms may reveal a significant correlation in nonsmokers as well. Thus, it is plausible that dACC-AI coupling may be associated with ADHD symptoms more broadly and not only in those who smoke. However, this hypothesis is speculative and requires further testing. Despite this, when evaluating smokers and non-smokers lacking a formal ADHD diagnosis, the significantly higher ADHD symptoms and dACC-AI coupling in smokers fits with the existent literature and supports the idea that these factors contribute to nicotine dependence.
Defining a single, specific role to the SN is difficult as the dACC and AI co-activate across a wide range of tasks, indicating that these regions play a ubiquitous role in cognitive and emotional processes. One theory is that these regions form a system pertaining to self-awareness and related responses. Awareness of cognitive, affective, and physical state is thought to be integrated by the AI, which projects to the dACC leading to response selection. This hypothesis fits with claim that the ACC plays a specific role in “attention for action” as well as the idea that the dACC and AI are involved in attentional direction and salience processing. These processes are disrupted by damage to either SN node as stroke damaging the insula reduces motivation and drive, including the motivation to smoke and cingulotomy patients note impairments in the initiation of behavior and formation of intentions (Cohen et al., 1999). It is plausible that optimal dACC-AI communication falls along a continuum with too little communication resulting in the deficits noted above while enhanced connectivity results in aberrant SN function contributing to greater reactivity to salient external stimuli such as smoking cues and neurocognitive symptoms associated with ADHD.
Emerging literature suggests a link between disrupted SN connectivity and ADHD. Relative to healthy adolescents, those with ADHD show reduced RAI scores and decreased SN-ECN connectivity. One hypotheses suggests that individuals with ADHD have an immature SN which may contribute to both a lack of proper task preparation and over-activation of the SN resulting in impulsivity, which is a common trait noted in those with a substance abuse disorder. Further, adults with ADHD have been found to have enhanced SN connectivity with other brain regions such as the putamen, which the author interprets as contributing to enhanced sensitivity to external stimuli. This theory fits with the idea that individuals with ADHD are more susceptible to interfering irrelevant stimuli. In relation to nicotine dependence, interference from external, irrelevant smoking stimuli predicts relapse vulnerability. Such behavioral interference is associated with the function and neurochemistry of the SN nodes and individuals with stronger dACC-AI connectivity at rest show greater brain reactivity to smoking cues. Collectively this suggests that greater dACC-AI connectivity may influence neurocognitive properties leading to enhanced interference and behavioral reactivity to external stimuli contributing to both ADHD and nicotine dependence. This conjecture is supported by recent work showing that moment-to-moment changes in arousal is associated with changes in SN connectivity. Specifically, inter-SN connectivity linearly increases with arousal, while SN-ECN connectivity shows an inverted-U shape pattern of connectivity, peaking at moderate arousal levels before dropping off at higher levels of arousal. While arousal was not measured directly in this study, it is plausible that the group differences and association with ADHD scores may map to differences in response to arousing stimuli. However, this hypothesis requires more direct testing.
While dACC-AI coupling was significantly greater in smokers, coupling strength was not associated with any smoking-related clinical variable (i.e., FTND, pack-year, CO). Prior reports have shown a weak negative association between dACC-AI coupling and number of cigarettes smoked over the past 60 days. However, the association we report in the current work (r = −0.28) was not statistically different (z = 0.32, p = 0.75) from the value reported by (r = − 0.21, p < 0.05) who reported a significant association due to their larger sample size (N =144). Nevertheless, the similar correlation values between studies suggests dACC-AI coupling may contribute in a small way to the variance in cigarettes smoked per day. It is possible that more posterior regions of the ACC and insula play a stronger role in this aspect of smoking behavior, as weaker connectivity between more caudal regions of the ACC and posterior insula is associated with nicotine addiction severity. In line with this, poorer cessation outcome has been associated with weaker posterior insula connectivity to primary somatosensory regions. Nicotine dependence severity also has been associated with weaker coupling between the dACC-dorsal striatum. The dorsal striatal activation reported by Hong did show slight overlap with the ventral posterior region of the insula, mirroring findings reported by Moran above. Collectively, these studies suggest that weaker dACC communication with regions beyond the dorsal anterior sub region of the insula studied here may be associated with dependence severity. The strong involvement of the currently studied dACC and insula regions is supported by the vast findings that these regions co-activate during smoking cue-exposure across studies and during cue-exposure the insula shows enhanced connectivity with brain circuits involved in motivated behavior. Thus, enhanced communication within the SN may not ubiquitously contribute to nicotine dependence but, as discussed above, this network may play a specific role in those aspects of nicotine dependence related to the function of this circuit such as reactivity to salient stimuli.
The current work has several limitations including our inability to define causality as our work relied on correlations to identify relationships between dACC-AI coupling and ASRS symptoms. Whether dACC-AI coupling strength changes along with a reduction in ADHD symptoms in those receiving effective treatment may provide a more causal link. The limited sample size also restricts our ability to identify the interaction of our main variables with other pertinent biological variables such as sex, which is relevant given sex differences in nicotine dependence. Despite these limitations, our work not only supports prior findings that ADHD symptoms contribute to nicotine dependence, but this work strengthens the idea of SN involvement in nicotine dependence. The current findings further the field by linking ADHD symptoms with intra-SN coupling, which may explain the high rates of smoking in those with ADHD and suggests a neurobiological treatment target that may aid both disorders.
Conflict of Interest
Eden Evins received research grant funding and/or study supplies to her institution from Forum Pharmaceuticals, GSK, and Pfizer, and has performed consulting work for Reckitt Benckiser and Pfizer. M. Fava was a consultant to Forum Pharmaceuticals and Envivo Pharmaceuticals. For a complete list of lifetime disclosures for M. Maurizio Fava, please see http://mghcme.org/faculty/faculty-detail/maurizio_fava. No conflict declared for A. Janes, J. Gilman, B. Frederick, M. Radoman, or G. Pachas.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
References
Irrelevant stimulus processing in ADHD: catecholamine dynamics and attentional networks
Increased functional connectivity in an insula-based network is associated with improved smoking cessation outcomes
High impulsivity predicts the switch to compulsive cocaine-taking
Brain metabolic changes during cigarette craving
Cingulate, frontal, and parietal cortical dysfunction in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Aberrant cross-brain network interaction in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and its relation to attention deficits: A multisite and cross-site replication study
Association between nicotine dependence severity, BOLD response to smoking cues, and functional connectivity
Adult ADHD self-Report scale (ASRS-v1.1) symptom checklist in patients with substance use disorders
The utility of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder screening instruments in individuals seeking treatment for substance use disorders
Insula reactivity to negative stimuli is associated with daily cigarette use: A preliminary investigation using the Human Connectome Database
Additional brain functional network in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A phase synchrony analysis
A core system for the implementation of task sets
Multi-site exploration of sex differences in brain reactivity to smoking cues: Consensus across sites and methodologies
Neural substrates of smoking cue reactivity: A meta-analysis of fMRI studies
Correcting for blood arrival time in global mean regression enhances functional connectivity analysis of resting state fMRI-BOLD signals
Granular insular cortex inactivation as a novel therapeutic strategy for nicotine addiction
Limbic activation to cigarette smoking cues independent of nicotine withdrawal: A perfusion fMRI study
Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine’s actions with separate cingulate cortex functional circuits
Insula-dorsal anterior cingulate cortex coupling is associated with enhanced brain reactivity to smoking cues
Revisiting the role of the insula and smoking cue-reactivity in relapse: A replication and extension of neuroimaging findings.
Brain reactivity to smoking cues prior to smoking cessation predicts ability to maintain tobacco abstinence
GABA levels in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex associated with difficulty ignoring smoking-related cues in tobacco-dependent volunteers
Neural correlates of response inhibition in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A controlled version of the stop-signal task
Visual inspection of independent components: Defining a procedure for artifact removal from fMRI data
The world organization adult ADHD self-report scale (ASRS): A short screening scale of use in the general population
Association between smoking and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms in a population based sample of young adults
Prospective study of tobacco smoking and substance dependencies among smaples of ADHD and non-ADHD participants
Large-scale brain network coupling predicts acute nicotine abstinence effects on craving and cognitive function
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder involves differential cortical processing in a visual spatial attention paradigm
Brain activation associated with attentional bias in smokers is modulated by a dopamine antagonist
Verbal memory impairment after left insular cortex infarction
Abstinence-induced changes in self-report craving correlate with event-related fMRI responses to smoking cues
Insular and anterior cingulate circuits in smokers with schizophrenia
Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: A unifying triple network model
Saliency, switching, attention and control: A network model of insula function
Damage to the insula disrupts addiction to cigarette smoking


Cigarette smoking in adult patients diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Localization of cognitive operations in the human brain
Electrical stimulation of the insular region attenuates nicotine-taking and nicotine-seeking behaviors
Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control
Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation at rest

Two systems of resting state connectivity between the insula and cingulate cortex
Network-level assessment of reward-related activation in patients with ADHD and healthy individuals
Attentional bias predicts outcome in smoking cessation
Ovarian hormones, menstrual cycle phase, and smoking: A review with recommendations for future studies
Neural response during anticipation of monetary loss is elevated in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Functional network connectivity predicts treatment outcome during treatment of nicotine use disorder
Dynamic shifts in large-scale brain network balance as a function of arousal
Relative to healthy controls, nicotine dependent tobacco smokers have significantly greater dACC-AI coupling at rest.
ASRS symptoms are positively correlated with dACC-AI coupling at rest. This association was significant in those with nicotine dependence.
Demographics comparing smokers to healthy controls. Smokers did not differ on age, or education but a significant difference was found in expired carbon monoxide levels. Information also is reported for specific smoking variables within the nicotine dependent cohort.
	Healthy Controls n = 17	Smokers n = 21	P	 	Age (years)	43.6 ± 11.3	39.9 ± 12.0	0.4	 	Education (years)	15.41 ± 2.2	14.4 ± 1.6	0.1	 	Cigarettes per day	0	19.0 ± 9.8	--	 	Expired CO (ppm)	2.29 ± 1.26	23.1 ± 15.1	0.000	 	FTND	0	5.3 ± 2.6	--	 	Total Craving Score (TQSU)	0	41.6 ± 13.9	--	 	
Highlights
Salience network (SN) coupling is greater in tobacco smokers vs. non-smokers.
Relative to healthy controls, smokers have more Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) symptoms.
Intra-SN connectivity is positively associated with ADHD symptoms.
