Disrupted Olfactory Integration in Schizophrenia: Functional Connectivity Study
Abstract
Background
Evidence for olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia has been firmly established. However, in the typical understanding of schizophrenia, olfaction is not recognized to contribute to or interact with the illness. Despite the solid presence of olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia, its relation to the rest of the illness remains largely unclear. Here, we aimed to examine functional connectivity of the olfactory bulb, olfactory tract, and piriform cortices and isolate the network that would account for the altered olfaction in schizophrenia.
Methods
We examined the functional connectivity of these specific olfactory regions in order to isolate other brain regions associated with olfactory processing in schizophrenia. Using the resting state functional MRI data from the Center for Biomedical Research Excellence in Brain Function and Mental Illness, we compared 84 patients of schizophrenia and 90 individuals without schizophrenia.
Results
The schizophrenia group showed disconnectivity between the anterior piriform cortex and the nucleus accumbens, between the posterior piriform cortex and the middle frontal gyrus, and between the olfactory tract and the visual cortices.
Conclusions
The current results suggest functional disconnectivity of olfactory regions in schizophrenia, which may account for olfactory dysfunction and disrupted integration with other sensory modalities in schizophrenia.
Significance Statement
Olfactory dysfunction has been repeatedly and consistently found in schizophrenia. However, it is unclear how olfactory dysfunction relates to other dysfunctions in schizophrenia and their pathophysiology. We examined functional connectivity of olfactory regions in schizophrenia using resting state fMRI data. Olfactory regions in schizophrenia showed less functional connectivity to other sensory regions and, multisensory integrative regions, and the prefrontal cortex compared with the healthy control group. Our results suggest that olfactory integration to other sensory modalities is disrupted in schizophrenia.
Introduction
There is established evidence supporting olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia. Olfactory disturbances have been reported since the 1960s. A previous and recent meta-analysis showed robust olfactory deficits in schizophrenia and also at-risk youths. Although olfaction may not be the central pathology in the typical dopaminergic understanding of schizophrenia, it has been shown that olfactory dysfunction can be induced by NMDA antagonists and that olfactory performance is associated with clinical measurements.
In olfactory sensation, the olfactory nerve sends afferent projections from the olfactory epithelium to the forebrain structure, the olfactory bulb. Unlike other sensory pathways, the olfactory pathway bypasses the brain stem and directly enters to the olfactory bulb, further projecting to the lateral olfactory tract and the anterior and posterior piriform cortices. In humans, the posterior piriform cortex in the temporal lobe has been isolated to encode categorical perception of odors, while the anterior piriform cortex in the frontal lobe is sensitive to higher order attentional control.
There is evidence suggesting that the pathology of olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia may lie in the olfactory bulb. Olfactory bulb volume has been found to be smaller in schizophrenia. A postmortem study showed decreased synaptic efficacy in the olfactory bulb of schizophrenia patients. Smaller olfactory bulb volume has also been seen in first-degree relatives of schizophrenic patients.
However, a limited number of neuroimaging studies of the olfactory system in schizophrenia have ever been conducted. A structural MRI study showed that association with olfactory sensation was found in the region that receives direct afferents from the olfactory bulb. Cortical volume of the anterior ventromedial temporal lobe is smaller in schizophrenia and shows association with olfactory threshold sensitivity. In a PET study, limbic and paralimbic regions showed lesser activation while experiencing unpleasant odors compared with the healthy cohorts. Patients of schizophrenia showed an impairment in detecting pleasant odors but not unpleasant ones. In another PET study, the left anterior cortex adjacent to the putamen, and the left inferior frontal gyrus showed association to dysfunction in olfactory sensation in schizophrenia.
It remains largely unclear how and/or whether olfactory dysfunction relates and contributes to other dysfunctions in schizophrenia. To clarify the brain regions that are associated with olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia, this study aimed to isolate olfactory connectivity disrupted in schizophrenia by examining resting state functional connectivity from the olfactory bulb, olfactory tract, anterior piriform cortex, and posterior piriform cortex.
Materials and Methods
Data Acquisition
The MRI images, the clinical data, and the demographic data from the Center for Biomedical Research Excellence in Brain Function and Mental Illness were obtained from Collaborative Informatics and Neuroimaging Suite (http://coins.mrn.org/). This data subset consisted of 183 individuals for whom both resting state and structural data were available. Among these individuals, 84 had a diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder (hereafter SZ group, 36.85±14.09 years old) based on the Structural Clinical Interview for DSM-IV for Axis I DSM-IV Disorders, and 90 were nonpsychiatric age-matched controls (control group, 37.5±11.40 years old). Nine individuals who had a diagnosis of bipolar disorder were excluded from further analysis.
Resting state echo planner image (EPI) volumes had 32 slices of 4 mm 64x64 matrix with 4-mm thickness (voxel size = 3x3x4 mm), with repetition time (TR) of 2000 milliseconds and echo time (TE) of 29 milliseconds. A total of 150 volumes (5 minutes) were used in the analysis. High-resolution structural T1 volume was acquired as 176 sagittal slices of 256 mm x 256 mm with 1-mm thickness (voxel size = 1x1x1 mm, TR=2530 milliseconds and TE=3.25 milliseconds).
Data Processing
Data preprocessing and statistical analyses were conducted using FMRIB Software Library (FSL) as well as Analysis of Functional NeuroImages. The anatomical volume for each subject was skull stripped, segmented (gray matter, white matter, and CSF), and registered to the MNI 2-mm standard brain. The first 4 EPI volumes were removed. Transient signal spikes were removed by despiking interpolation. To correct head motion, the volumes were linearly registered to the then-first volume, through which 6 motion parameters and displacement distance between 2 consecutive volumes were estimated. Each of the resting state volumes was regressed by white matter and cerebrospinal fluid signal fluctuations as well as the 6 motion parameters. After smoothing with a 6-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel, the volumes were resampled, spatially transformed, and aligned to the MNI 2-mm standard brain space. Through this registration, 12 affine parameters were created between rs-fMRI volume and MNI152 2-mm space, so that a seed ROI can later be registered to each individual rs-fMRI space. To perform scrubbing where the volumes with excess motion are removed, as a displacement distance between 2 EPI volumes, the root mean square deviation was calculated from motion correction parameters, at an r=40-mm spherical surface using FSL’s rmsdiff tool. Volumes whose displacement distance exceeded the threshold (0.3 mm) were removed (scrubbed) from further statistical analyses.
The olfactory bulb, olfactory tract, anterior piriform cortex, and posterior piriform cortex were manually segmented in the MNI 2-mm space (Figure 1) following anatomical descriptions in the literature. For each ROI, voxel-wise connectivity analysis was conducted. The time course was spatially averaged within the ROI that was registered to the EPI space so that correlations can be tested between the ROI and each individual voxel across the brain. The Z-scores representing the correlations between the ROI and a voxel were used for group-level analysis after registration to the MNI 2-mm brain space.
Four regions of interest (ROIs) specified in the MNI 152 2-mm brain space. Axial images shown included regions anterior to the brain stem (y ≧ -12).
The SZ and control groups were compared by randomise script in FSL. Z-statistic images were estimated where clusters were determined by the statistical threshold of Z > 2.326 with a family-wise error-corrected cluster significance threshold, assuming a Gaussian random field for the Z-statistics. The peak voxels within a cluster were calculated by using voxelwise family-wise error corrected t test images.
Results
Voxel-wise statistical analysis of functional connectivity from the olfactory tract, and anterior and posterior piriform cortices showed regions that have lesser connectivity in the SZ group, compared with the control group (Table 1; Figures 2–4). Specifically, the olfactory tract in the SZ group showed less connectivity with the left occipital and parietal region, the anterior piriform cortex with the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex, and the posterior piriform cortex with the left frontal cortex. There was no group difference found with the olfactory bulb. None of the 4 ROIs indicated any greater connectivity in the SZ group than the control group.

Regions of Lesser Connectivity in the SZ Group (Cluster Z > 2.326)
Seed	Voxels	Peak MNI Coordinates	Region	 	x	y	z	 	Olfactory tract	 		4458	-16	-66	54	Left lateral occipital cortex, precuneus cortex	 	Anterior piriform cortex	 		3358	16	18	-12	Right nucleus accumbens	 			6	54	46	Right superior frontal gyrus	 	Posterior piriform cortex	 		3309	-24	20	42	Left middle frontal gyrus	 	
Olfactory tract connectivity. Regions that showed significantly lesser connectivity in the schizophrenia (SZ) group than the control group.
Anterior piriform connectivity. Regions that showed significantly lesser connectivity in the schizophrenia (SZ) group than the control group.
Posterior piriform connectivity. Regions that showed significantly lesser connectivity in the schizophrenia (SZ) group than the control group.
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that examined functional connectivity from the olfactory regions in schizophrenia. The results indicate the presence of disrupted connectivity between the olfactory tract and visual cortices, between the anterior piriform cortex and the nucleus accumbens, and between the posterior piriform cortex and the middle frontal gyrus. The findings here are new but coherent with previous literature suggesting disrupted olfactory integration in schizophrenia.
The anterior piriform cortex (APC) showed disconnectivity to the nucleus accumbens (NAcc). While the NAcc and olfactory regions have been known to have similar projections, the association between the piriform cortex and NAcc has been shown as a part of a feeding-related circuitry for which odors play critical roles. In schizophrenia, stronger functional connectivities of the NAcc have been found to be associated with hallucination. In patients with auditory hallucination, NAcc functional connectivity to the superior temporal gyrus is increased, as well as to the cingulate gyrus and ventral tegmental area, suggesting the enhanced connectivity between the NAcc and auditory cortices that may underlie the auditory hallucinations. The NAcc has been implicated in audio visual integration of speech in schizophrenia, suggesting that the NAcc is involved in multi-modal sensory integration. Our finding of decreased connectivity between the APC and NAcc may suggest that olfactory input to the NAcc is disrupted and may contribute to multi-sensory disintegration whose outcome includes auditory hallucinations.
The piriform regions in schizophrenia showed disrupted connectivities to the prefrontal regions. Disconnectivity in schizophrenia was found between the APC and right superior frontal gyrus extending to the orbitofrontal cortex (Figure 3) and between the posterior piriform cortex (PPC) and middle frontal gyrus (Figure 4). There has been known anatomical projections between prefrontal cortex and olfactory regions in rats and primates. In human fMRI, the orbitofrontal cortex has been shown to be coding olfactory valence, independent from intensity, suggesting that the connectivity between olfactory regions to orbitofrontal cortex accommodates odor valence. The piriform-prefrontal disconnectivity in schizophrenia in our results may account for the disrupted olfactory discrimination and identification in schizophrenia.
The PPC showed disconnectivity to the middle frontal gyrus. The PPC has been shown to furnish categorical perception. At the same time, the middle frontal gyrus has been implicated in detecting mixtures of odors compared with simplex odors, suggesting the associative role of categorical perception processed in the PPC. Indeed, tasks used in the previous studies employed complex odors where disruptions in performance were found in the schizophrenia group. Although it remains unclear whether schizophrenia influences more selectively to sensing mixtures of odors, our finding suggests that the PPC-middle frontal gyrus disconnectivity in schizophrenia may account for the olfactory dysfunctions found in the literature.
Disconnectivity between the olfactory tract and visual cortices including the lateral occipital cortex and precuneus cortices suggests that olfactory information may not be synchronized with visual information in schizophrenia. This may be consistent with disrupted multisensory integration of olfactory input. At the same time, abnormalities in the occipital lobe have been consistently reported. The current methods do not provide evidence to account for the relations between sensory integration and occipital disruptions.
While olfactory malfunction has been more widely known in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, olfactory malfunction is not usually considered to be one of the central symptoms in either disorder. Since it has been suggested that the pathology is in the central nervous system and not in the olfactory epithelium, we aimed to detect olfactory disruption in the olfactory bulb and its system. The pathology, however, may originate further in the periphery. A reduced quantity of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is found in the olfactory epithelium tissues of patients of schizophrenia, which may be accounted for by the pathology of olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia. A reduction of protein synthesis in olfactory cells in schizophrenia has been reported. Olfactory neural epithelium has been recently suggested to indicate signatures of schizophrenia. The design used in our study does not permit any judgment on whether the pathology in the epithelium affects the disconnectivity of the central olfactory regions found in this study. Although our study did not detect any disconnectivity in the olfactory bulb, our finding in the other olfactory regions may be the consequences of dysfunctions in the olfactory epithelium.
It has to be noted that the SZ groups are not treatment naïve. Therefore, our finding may be due to antipsychotic medications or other complications from the illness. Although olfactory dysfunctions have been reported in first relatives, the current methodology does not distinguish schizophrenia pathology and consequences of medications.
This study suggests the presence of functional disconnectivity of olfactory regions in schizophrenia. The functional disconnectivity may account for olfactory dysfunction and disrupted integration with other sensory modalities in schizophrenia.
Interest Statement
Dr. Ikuta has received speaker’s honoraria from Eli Lilly, Daiichi Sankyo, and Dainippon Sumitomo.
References
Dissociated neural representations of intensity and valence in human olfaction
The human brain distinguishes between single odorants and binary mixtures
Neuropsychological, olfactory, and hygiene deficits in men with negative symptom schizophrenia
Impairment of olfactory identification ability in individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis who later develop schizophrenia
Olfactory sensitivity through the course of psychosis: Relationships to olfactory identification, symptomatology and the schizophrenia odour
The patterns of afferent innervation of the core and shell in the “Accumbens” part of the rat ventral striatum: immunohistochemical detection of retrogradely transported fluoro-gold
Central olfactory connections in the macaque monkey
Sensory and premotor connections of the orbital and medial prefrontal cortex of macaque monkeys
Thalamus and posterior temporal lobe show greater inter-network connectivity at rest and across sensory paradigms in schizophrenia
Neural mechanisms of anhedonia in schizophrenia: a pet study of response to unpleasant and pleasant odors
Olfactory deficits predict cognitive decline and Alzheimer dementia in an urban community
Molecular evidence for decreased synaptic efficacy in the postmortem olfactory bulb of individuals with schizophrenia
Reduced protein synthesis in schizophrenia patient-derived olfactory cells

Central mechanisms of odour object perception
The subcortical projections ofthe allocortex: similarities in the neural associations of the hippocampus, the piriform cortex, and the neocortex
Olfactory changes in schizophrenia
Molecular signatures associated with cognitive deficits in schizophrenia: a study of biopsied olfactory neural epithelium
Odor quality coding and categorization in human posterior piriform cortex
Olfactory deficits in schizophrenia
Recent advances in the phencyclidine model of schizophrenia
Odor hedonic capacity and anhedonia in schizophrenia and unaffected first-degree relatives of schizophrenia patients
Odor naming and interpretation performance in 881 schizophrenia subjects: association with clinical parameters
Olfactory deficits in neuroleptic naive patients with schizophrenia
Dopamine receptor transcript expression in striatum and prefrontal and occipital cortex: focal abnormalities in orbitofrontal cortex in schizophrenia
Olfactory function and morphology of olfactory epithelium in an adult population with schizophrenia
Olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia: a qualitative and quantitative review
Meta-analysis of olfactory function in schizophrenia, first-degree family members, and youths at-risk for psychosis
Olfactory thresholds are associated with degree of dementia in Alzheimer’s disease
Cortical Thinning in cingulate and occipital cortices in first episode schizophrenia
Occipital lobe gray matter volume in male patients with chronic schizophrenia: a quantitative MRI study
Proteoglycan abnormalities in olfactory epithelium tissue from subjects diagnosed with schizophrenia
Left temporo-limbic and orbital dysfunction in schizophrenia during odor familiarity and hedonicity judgments
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion
Recent progress and outstanding issues in motion correction in resting state fMRI
Resting-state functional connectivity of the nucleus accumbens in auditory and visual hallucinations in schizophrenia
Association of olfactory dysfunction with risk for future Parkinson’s disease
Correlation of dopaminergic terminal dysfunction and microstructural abnormalities of the basal ganglia and the olfactory tract in Parkinson’s disease
Statistical improvements in functional magnetic resonance imaging analyses produced by censoring high-motion data points
Activation of feeding-related neural circuitry after unilateral injections of muscimol into the nucleus accumbens shell
Audiovisual integration of speech is disturbed in schizophrenia: an fMRI study
GABAA and GABAB receptors in the anterior piriform cortex modulate feeding in rats
Decrements in volume of anterior ventromedial temporal lobe and olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia
Scents and nonsense: olfactory dysfunction in schizophrenia
Olfactory memory in unmedicated schizophrenics
Attentional modulation in human primary olfactory cortex
