Polygenic risk for five psychiatric disorders and cross-disorder and disorder-specific neural connectivity in two independent populations
Major psychiatric disorders, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism (AUT), bipolar disorder (BD), major depressive disorder (MDD), and schizophrenia (SZ), are highly heritable and polygenic. Evidence suggests that these five disorders have both shared and distinct genetic risks and neural connectivity abnormalities. To measure aggregate genetic risks, the polygenic risk score (PGRS) was computed. Two independent general populations (N = 360 and N = 323) were separately examined to investigate whether the cross-disorder PGRS and PGRS for a specific disorder were associated with individual variability in functional connectivity. Consistent altered functional connectivity was found with the bilateral insula: for the left supplementary motor area and the left superior temporal gyrus with the cross-disorder PGRS, for the left insula and right middle and superior temporal lobe associated with the PGRS for autism, for the bilateral midbrain, posterior cingulate, cuneus, and precuneus associated with the PGRS for BD, and for the left angular gyrus and the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex associated with the PGRS for schizophrenia. No significant functional connectivity was found associated with the PGRS for ADHD and MDD. Our findings indicated that genetic effects on the cross-disorder and disorder-specific neural connectivity of common genetic risk loci are detectable in the general population. Our findings also indicated that polygenic risk contributes to the main neurobiological phenotypes of psychiatric disorders and that identifying cross-disorder and specific functional connectivity related to polygenic risks may elucidate the neural pathways for these disorders.
Highlights
Altered cross-disorder functional connectivity related to PGRSs is detected.
Altered disorder-specific functional connectivity related to PGRSs is detected.
Altered functional connectivity related to PGRSs is involved in brain networks.
Polygenic risk contributes to neurobiological phenotypes of psychiatric disorders.
Introduction
Major psychiatric disorders, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism (AUT), bipolar disorder (BD), major depressive disorder (MDD), and schizophrenia (SZ), are highly heritable and polygenic. Previous studies suggested that these disorders share genetic risks. Specifically, both shared and specific risk loci for five major psychiatric disorders have been identified. Another study estimating genetic variation within and covariation between these disorders found that SNPs explained 17–29% of the variance in liability. Thus, these studies supported shared and specific genetic etiologies for these five disorders. However, in addition to significant SNPs associated with these disorders identified by GWAS, a number of SNPs whose individual effects are very small and do not reach a genome-wide significance level collectively contribute a large proportion to genetic risk and explain a substantial part of the heritability of these mental disorders.
The polygenic risk score (PGRS), calculated by summing the logarithms of the odds ratios of the associated alleles, was introduced to summarize the effects of a set of SNPs based on the GWAS summary statistics of a training dataset. This method has proven effective in conveying polygenic risks and has been applied in many studies, especially cross-disorder studies. This method was first proposed to find common polygenic variation between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Another study that examined the five major psychiatric disorders also applied PGRS to find common polygenic risk between pairs of disorders. PGRS is also a useful and important method in imaging genetics, in which PGRS is utilized to examine the impact of genetic risk on the underlying neurobiology. A cross-disorder imaging genetics study using the PGRS model found that abnormal frontal activation was related to an increased risk for schizophrenia.
Previous evidence consistently showed disrupted neural connectivity in major psychiatric disorders. Resting-state fMRI is a powerful method for evaluating regional interactions in clinical populations. Aberrant functional connectivity is associated with psychiatric disorders and many brain networks, including the salience, central executive control, and default mode network, have been found to be affected. For example, the salience network is associated with all of these disorders, the central executive network is associated with schizophrenia and the default mode network is associated with BD and schizophrenia. Functional connectivity and the brain network have been widely used as promising endophenotypes to establish the link between specific genetic variants and psychiatric disorders. However, few studies investigated the relationship between polygenic risk for psychiatric disorders and functional connectivity. A previous study detected effects of polygenic risk on brain activation for specific ones of these five disorders. However, altered functional connectivity patterns associated with the cross-disorder PGRS and disorder-specific functional connectivity patterns associated with the PGRS for these five disorders remain unrevealed. To address this issue, we studied the functional connectivity alterations associated with cross-disorder PGRSs and disorder-specific altered functional connectivity patterns associated with the PGRSs for these five disorders using young healthy subjects in two independent datasets. First, we calculated the cross-disorder PGRSs and PGRSs for these five psychiatric disorders separately in the 2 independent populations using summary statistics from the PGC GWAS Cross Disorder group as training data. Then, we generated a functional connectivity profile for each subject. Next, we performed a voxel-wise statistical analysis to examine the relationships between the PGRSs and the functional connectivities separately in the two independent datasets. After that, we performed conjunction analyses to investigate the overlapping shared and disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations between these two datasets. Finally, we tried to find whether PGRS calculated using other thresholds produced similar results.
Materials and methods
Demographics of participants
Demographic characteristics of the participants.
Table 1	 	
	Dataset 1	Dataset 2	 	Number of subjects	360	323	 	Male	186	157	 	Age	19.4 ± 1.1	22.7 ± 2.5	 	Age range	18–24	18–31	 	Education	12.3 ± 0.8	15.5 ± 2.7	 	
Dataset 1: Dataset 1 included 360 healthy young Chinese subjects (Table 1). The subjects and their relatives within the third-degree had no history of psychiatric disorders. None of the participants had a history of psychiatric treatment, drug or alcohol abuse, traumatic brain injury, or visible brain lesions on conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). They all gave full written informed consent to join the study. The Ethics Committee of the School of Life Science and Technology at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China approved this study.
Dataset 2: 323 healthy young Chinese subjects were included in Dataset 2 (Table 1). None of the subjects nor their first-degree relatives had a history of psychiatric diagnoses, of neurological or metabolic illnesses, or of drug or alcohol abuse. They all gave full written informed consent to participate in the study. The Ethics Committee of Tianjin Medical University approved this study.
Genotyping and quality control
We collected whole blood and extracted genomic DNA using the EZgene Blood gDNA Miniprep Kit for all subjects. Next we performed whole-genome genotyping using the standard Illumina genotyping protocol on Illumina Human OmniZhongHua-8 BeadChips. Plink was used to perform quality control, using the same procedure for both datasets. First, the individuals, 1 from Dataset 1 and 3 from Dataset 2, whose missing genotype rates were > 0.05 were excluded. Then, we removed the one with the greater missing genotype rate from each pair that had more similar genotypes identified by estimating the pairwise identity-by-descent (IBD) than we would have expected in a random sample, removing 2 individuals from Dataset 1 and 5 individuals from Dataset 2. Next, SNPs with missing genotype rates > 0.05, a minor allele frequency < 0.01, or a significant departure from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (P < 0.001) were excluded. Finally, a principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to control for population stratification using EIGENSTART on a linkage disequilibrium (LD) pruned set of autosomal SNPs obtained by carrying out LD pruning with PLINK and removing 5 long-range LD regions with the HapMap phase 3 reference dataset. We removed the outliers of the sample (> 6 SD) after we identified 10 principle components. A Q-Q plot was applied and showed that the population stratification was well controlled with λ = 1.03043 (Supplementary Fig. 1). After these quality control procedures, 356 and 311 subjects respectively in Datasets 1 and 2 were included for subsequent analyses. Additionally, > 700.000 SNPs survived the pruning procedures.
Imputation and PGRS generation
The genome coordinates were converted from hg19 to hg18 assembly using liftOver (https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgLiftOver) to be consistent with the reference dataset used to perform imputation and the training dataset used to calculate the PGRS. Ungenotyped SNPs were imputed using SHAPEIT and IMPUTE2 with an HapMap phase 3 reference dataset. After imputation, 1,381,116 SNPs were included for the following analysis. We removed the SNPs with imputation quality scores < 0.8, missing genotype rates > 0.05, a minor allele frequency < 0.01, or significant departure from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (P < 0.0001). About 960,000 SNPs survived the pruning procedures and were used to calculate the PGRSs. The GWAS data used to calculate the PGRS was pruned for linkage disequilibrium (r2 < 0.25) at thresholds of PT < 0.01, PT < 0.05, PT < 0.1 and PT < 0.5.
It is important to choose an appropriate P-threshold to define PGRS and methods are proposed to choose the threshold. However, since this is a data driven study without predefined phenotypes, this method could not work on our study.
A more stringent threshold generates a SNP set with less SNPs being truly associated with the disorders. With a more liberal threshold, more SNPs will be included, which will help increase the statistical power. But too liberal threshold will include SNPs that are too weakly associated with the disorders. So the statistical power will decrease. Among these four thresholds, PT < 0.05 could be a balance of statistical power and the number of SNPs. So our research was primarily based on the PGRS calculated at PT < 0.05, and we analyzed PGRS at other thresholds based on the results of PT < 0.05.
We calculated the PGRS using the method described in a previous paper. First we calculated the cross-disorder PGRSs and then calculated PGRSs for each of these five disorders (ADHD, autism, BD, MDD, schizophrenia) separately. The summary GWAS results from the PGC GWAS Cross Disorder group were used as training datasets.
fMRI image acquisition and preprocessing
The image acquisition from each scanner was finished within six months. There were no hardware or system upgrades for either scanner, and the sequence and protocols for each subject were kept constant in each scanning period. The subjects from Dataset 1 were scanned on a MR750 3.0T magnetic resonance scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI). Resting-state functional imaging data was obtained using a gradient-echo echo-planar-imaging (GRE-EPI) sequence with the following configuration: echo time (TE) = 30 ms, repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms, flip angle = 90°, field of view (FOV) = 240 × 240 mm2, matrix = 64 × 64, voxel size = 3.75 × 3.75 × 4.00 mm3, 39 slices and 255 volumes. The subjects from Dataset 2 were scanned using a Signa HDx 3.0T scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI). We used a single-shot gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (SS-GRE-EPI) sequence to perform resting-state functional imaging with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, field of view (FOV) = 240 × 240 mm2, matrix = 64 × 64, flip angle = 90°, voxel size = 3.75 × 3.75 × 4.00 mm3, 40 slices, and 180 volumes. All participants were asked to close their eyes and avoid movement, think about nothing in particular, and avoid sleeping. After scanning, the subjects were asked if they fell asleep to ensure that they had all remained awake. The same preprocessing procedures were applied to each dataset, and DPARSFA (Data Processing Assistant for Resting State fMRI Advanced Edition, http://www.restfmri.net/forum/DPARSF) was used to preprocess the images. The preprocessing procedures included: (1) removing the first 10 volumes; (2) slice timing; (3) head motion correction; (4) spatial normalization; (5) smoothing with a 6 mm Gaussian kernel; (6) removing the influence of the whole brain signals, head motions, and linear trends; and (7) temporal band-pass filtration (0.01–0.08 HZ). After preprocessing, 28 and 14 subjects respectively from Datasets 1 and 2 were excluded due to a maximum displacement > 2 mm or a spin > 2° in any of the cardinal directions.
ROI definition
Z-score maps of the meta-analysis for five major psychiatric disorders: (A) ADHD, (B) autism, (C) BD, (D) MDD, (E) schizophrenia. (F) is a binary image of our ROI displaying the overlap between the five maps. MNI coordinates were used.
Fig. 1
Since cross-disorder PGRS indicates shared genetic risks for these five psychiatric disorders, brain regions that showed disruption in all five major psychiatric disorders were chosen as a ROI to investigate the associations between functional connectivity and cross-disorder PGRS and contributions of subscores for each of these five disorders to the cross-disorder impacts using resting-state fMRI. We used statistical inference maps acquired from Neurosynth (http://neurosynth.org/) to define the region of interest (ROI) for further functional connectivity analysis. We searched the meta-analysis results from Neurosynth (http://neurosynth.org/) for the 5 major psychiatric disorders, separately using ADHD, autism, bipolar, depression, and schizophrenia as search terms. If a study used one of the searched keywords, we obtained statistical inference maps displaying z-scores according to the probability of a region's being activated. In other words, these maps displayed the brain regions that were consistently activated in studies that loaded highly on a specific term. A large z-score means that this region was reported more often than expectation under the hypothesis that activations in the brain would be equally likely. These maps were thresholded at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (Fig. 1). The brain regions affected by all 5 disorders were defined as an ROI. This ROI primarily included the bilateral insula, which is reasonable since the insulae have been suggested as being affected by all five major psychiatric disorders. Then we resampled the voxel size of the ROI to 3 × 3 × 3 mm3 to match the voxel size of the fMRI images we acquired after preprocessing (Fig. 1).
Functional connectivity calculation
Based on the defined ROI, we calculated voxel-wise bilateral insular functional connectivity maps for each subject throughout the whole brain. These functional maps were calculated by computing the Pearson's correlation coefficient between the average BOLD time series in the ROI and the time series from all the voxels within a gray matter mask of the whole brain. The correlations were transformed to a Gaussian distribution using Fisher's z-transformation.
Statistical analysis
We performed a second-level analysis using SPM12 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) with the subjects in the two independent datasets, separately. We applied a multiple regression model and voxel-wise t-test to test for significant correlations between the PGRSs and the voxel-wise functional connectivity. Age, sex, and the 3 top principle components were included in the model as covariates. To correct for multiple comparisons, an Alphasim algorithm implemented in REST was applied. Statistical maps were thresholded at a voxel-level of p < 0.05 and cluster size > 90 voxels to reach a cluster-level significance of alpha < 0.05. After correcting for multiple comparisons, we conducted conjunction analyses. First we performed a conjunction analysis to find consistent functional connectivity alterations associated with cross-disorder PGRS between these two datasets. Then we conducted another two conjunction analyses to find disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations, first performing a conjunction analysis for each dataset to find disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations and then conducting the second conjunction analysis to find consistent disorder-specific functional connectivity patterns with the bilateral insula in both datasets. Clusters larger than 10 voxels were retained.
Then to find whether PGRSs calculated using other thresholds produce similar results, we conducted the same analysis as above using PGRS calculated with PT < 0.01, 0.1 and 0.5 separately, but only considering the significant voxels at PT < 0.05, not the voxels in the whole brain. To correct for multiple comparisons, an Alphasim algorithm implemented in REST was applied. Statistical maps were thresholded at a voxel-level of p < 0.05 and cluster size > 12 voxels for autism, 9 voxels for BD and 7 voxels for schizophrenia to reach a cluster-level significance of alpha < 0.05.
Results
Consistent functional connectivity alterations with the bilateral insula associated with the cross-disorder PGRSs (PT < 0.05) using Dataset 1 and Dataset 2. The values of each voxel in these maps are only 0, − 1 (blue). A value of − 1 indicates significant negative associations separately between functional connectivity in these regions with the defined ROI and PGRS. Only clusters with > 10 voxels are displayed. MNI coordinates are used.
Fig. 2
Statistics for clusters that have consistent altered functional connectivity related to cross-disorder and disorder-specific PGRS (PT < 0.05) across two datasets.
Table 2	 	
Disorder	Cluster size	Peak MNI coordinates	Peak t-value	Peak MNI coordinate region	 	AUT	34	(57,− 11,− 11)	2.9347	Temporal_Mid_R	 	87	(− 36,13,− 11)	2.5448	Insula_L	 	1	(9,28,22)	1.8169	Cingulum_Ant_R	 	1	(− 6,16,34)	1.7014	Cingulum_Mid_L	 	BD	2	(− 30,− 11,− 23)	− 1.6619	ParaHippocampal_L	 	17	(− 12,− 17,− 23)	− 2.7021	Left Pons	 	14	(12,− 17,− 20)	− 2.1886	Right midbrain	 	1	(18,− 14,− 11)	− 1.7669	Right midbrain	 	10	(− 3,− 56,7)	1.8777	Precuneus_L	 	41	(− 9,− 83,31)	2.0736	Cuneus_L	 	9	(21,13,67)	1.8024	Frontal_Sup_R	 	SZ	20	(− 42,46,13)	− 2.3668	Frontal_Mid_L	 	15	(− 54,− 62,28)	2.2003	Angular_L	 	2	(− 30,28,34)	− 1.9412	Frontal_Mid_L	 	Cross-disorder	11	(− 57,− 20,7)	− 1.984	Temporal_Sup_L	 	1	(− 18,55,28)	− 1.7596	Frontal_Sup_L	 	20	(− 3,4,52)	− 2.0877	Supp_Motor_Area_L	 	7	(− 3,− 11,70)	− 1.9129	Supp_Motor_Area_L	 	
Using healthy subjects in both datasets, we first investigated the consistent functional connectivity alterations associated with cross-disorder PGRSs at PT < 0.05. Statistical maps and statistical tables for clusters survived multiple comparison correction for each dataset are included in the Supplementary materials (Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 2). We found that the cross-disorder PGRSs were negatively related to functional connectivity for left supplementary motor area and left superior temporal gyrus with bilateral insula consistently in both datasets (Table 2 and Fig. 2).
Consistent disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations associated with the PGRSs(PT < 0.05) for: (A) autism, (B) BD and (C) schizophrenia, with the bilateral insula using Datasets 1 and 2. The values of each voxel in these maps are only 0, − 1 (blue), and 1 (red). A value of 1 and − 1 indicates significant positive and negative associations separately between functional connectivity in these regions with the defined ROI and PGRS. Only clusters with > 10 voxels are displayed. MNI coordinates are used.
Fig. 3
Then we studied the consistent disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations associated with PGRSs at PT < 0.05 for each of these five disorders using healthy subjects in both datasets. Statistical maps and statistical tables for clusters survived multiple comparison correction for each dataset are included in the Supplementary Materials (Supplementary Table 1, Supplementary Fig. 2). We found consistent specific functional connectivity patterns associated with the PGRS for three of the five disorders: autism, BD, and schizophrenia, but not for ADHD and MDD. An increasing PGRS for autism was associated with increasing functional connectivities for the right middle and the superior temporal lobe and left insula with the bilateral insula. An increasing PGRS for bipolar disorder was associated with increasing functional connectivities for the bilateral cuneus, precuneus, and posterior cingulate with bilateral insula and decreasing functional connectivities for the bilateral midbrains with bilateral insula. We also observed that an increasing PGRS for schizophrenia was associated with increasing functional connectivities for the left angular gyrus and decreasing functional connectivities for the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), both with the bilateral insula (Table2 and Fig. 3).
Considering different PGRS thresholds, we found that when PT < 0.1, cross-disorder PGRS was related to the functional connectivity between the bilateral insula and the left superior temporal lobe and the left supplementary motor area negatively. PGRS for autism was positively related to the functional connectivity between the bilateral insula and the right middle and superior temporal lobe when PT < 0.01 and the functional connectivity for left insula and the right middle and superior temporal lobe with the bilateral insula when PT < 0.1 (Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Fig. 3). And we did not find consistent altered functional connectivity related to PGRS for other disorders or PGRS calculated using other thresholds.
Discussion
Using young healthy subjects in two independent datasets, we revealed distinct altered bilateral insular functional connectivity patterns associated with the cross-disorder PGRS and the PGRS for three of five major psychiatric disorders. As far as we know, this is the first study to concentrate on associations between functional connectivity patterns and the cross-disorder PGRS and the PGRS for specific ones of these five diseases applying an imaging genetics method. Shared and disorder-specific brain networks, such as the default mode, salience, and central executive networks, showed functional connectivity alterations associated with the cross-disorder PGRSs and PGRSs for specific ones of these disorders. Our findings imply that cross-disorder and disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations are related to the PGRS and, thus, could also be genetically modulated.
Many case-control studies have indicated that the PGRSs for specific disorders are associated with disease status and disorder severity. Furthermore, this model was applied to datasets consisting only of healthy controls to quantify the polygenic risk for schizophrenia as well as being applied to a cross-disorder analysis. We calculated the cross-disorder PGRSs and the PGRSs for each of these five disorders using healthy subjects in 2 independent datasets. Cross-disorder PGRSs indicate shared genetic risks among these disorders and are related to PGRSs for each of these five disorders. We used the PGRSs to detect the additive effects of a large set of SNPs in this study. The PGRS model evaluated the cumulative effects of the SNPs associated with disease status in each subject and provided a tool that allowed us to utilize the power of the GWAS results. Correlations between the PGRSs and functional connectivity alterations discovered in our study indicated that functional connectivity alterations were related to specific genetic variants. Our findings seem to support the hypothesis that common genetic variants can explain the functional alterations associated with the risk for these disorders and may partially further explain the neurobiological mechanisms of psychiatric disorders. Although we did not find studies that had previously detected such associations between functional connectivity and the PGRS, some studies that focused on the associations between abnormal patterns of activation and PGRSs provided evidence for that hypothesis. Most of these focused on the PGRS for schizophrenia and found abnormal prefrontal activation patterns; a few focused on the PGRS for bipolar disorder. These studies may suggest that common genetic variants influence the main neurobiological phenotypes of these psychiatric disorders.
Previous studies indicated that abnormalities associated with different disorders may occur in common brain regions. The meta-analysis results from Neurosynth (http://neurosynth.org/) showed that the bilateral anterior insula are related to all five major psychiatric disorders, so it is a reasonable ROI to find functional connectivity alterations related to cross-disorder PGRS. However, previous publications also indicated that abnormal insula functional connectivity patterns of different disorders may be different. So this is an interesting ROI to identify cross-disorder and disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations. The anterior insula is a hub in the salience network. The insula is believed to be involved in diverse functions, including perception, motor control, cognitive functioning, self-awareness, and emotions. Many studies have indicated that the salience network, especially the anterior insula, plays an important role in psychiatric disorders and insula dysfunctions and that these abnormalities are associated with major psychiatric disorders.
The associations between the cross-disorder PGRS and functional connectivity observed in our study indicate that the cross-disorder PGRS is associated with the altered functional connectivity within the salience network and these functional connectivity alterations are associated with shared common genetic variants of these five disorders. The salience network abnormalities are found in all of these five major psychiatric disorders. It is also found that symptom severity of autism and MDD is related to the salience network. Our results suggest that the salience network may play an important role in the neurobiological mechanisms of these five major psychiatric disorders.
To identify the genetic effects on functional connectivity alterations of each specific disorder, we analyzed the associations between PGRSs for each of these five disorders and whole brain functional connectivities. We did not find PGRSs for a specific disorder have significant associations with functional connectivities between the bilateral insula and the left supplementary motor area and the left superior temporal lobe, indicating cross-disorder impacts. However, we found disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations associated with PGRSs for specific disorders, indicating that these functional connectivity alterations were related to specific genetic variants.
We observed hyperconnectivity associated with the PGRS for autism between the left insula and the bilateral insula within the salience network, which is involved in affective processing, interoception, and identifying related internal and extrapersonal stimulation to guide behavior. The altered functional connectivity with the bilateral insula may suggest the neuropathology of autism. The salience network acts to find salient endogenous events and initiates and mobilizes resources for suitable responses. A study stated that hyperconnectivity in the salience network could be used to distinguish autism patients from healthy controls. However, some studies that identified reduced functional connectivities in the salience network in autism are incongruent with ours, so additional evidence is needed to confirm the functions of the anterior insula and the salience network in autism. We also found hyperconnectivity between the bilateral insula and the right middle temporal lobe and superior temporal lobe. These regions are involved in biological motion processing, play an important part in social and speech perception, and are implicated in the development of autism. The altered functional connectivity that correlated with the PGRS for autism supports some functions that are known to be impaired in autism. Thus, our findings may help to partially explain the functional impairment in autism.
We found that an increasing PGRS for bipolar disorder was associated with decreasing functional connectivities between the bilateral midbrains and the bilateral insula and with increasing functional connectivity patterns between the bilateral insula and the bilateral posterior cingulate cortex, cuneus, and precuneus. The brainstem regions may mediate the bodily changes that accompany emotional behaviors. Many studies suggested that the brainstem may be involved in the pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. Specifically, impairment in the brainstem has been implicated in manic symptoms. Increasing functional connectivities with the insulae were found for the posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus, which are parts of default mode network. Previous studies have detected abnormalities in the default mode network associated with bipolar disorder. The salience network plays an important role in switching between the default and the central-executive networks. The increasing functional connectivities between the salience and default mode networks with increasing PGRS for bipolar disorder may indicate a disturbance in the switch function and be associated with cognitive and affective processing problems in bipolar disorder.
We also found that the PGRS for schizophrenia was associated with functional connectivity positively between the bilateral insula and the left angular gyrus and negatively between the bilateral insula and the left DLPFC. The angular gyrus is a part of the default network and is involved in semantic processing, memory retrieval, attention, and social cognition. The DLPFC is a hub of the central-executive network and is involved in decision making, working memory, and cognitive functions. A recent case-control study provided evidence for an aberrant dependence of the default mode network and central executive network interactions on salience network activity and associations between the impaired activity in these regions and psychosis in schizophrenia. Our research indicates that these abnormal interactions are modulated by genetic factors and may be an aid in understanding the neurobiological mechanism of schizophrenia.
These five major psychiatric disorders are clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders with high heritability. However, the specificity of the link between polygenetic risk and neural mechanisms remains elusive. By simultaneously analyzing the associations between the PGRSs for these five disorders and the functional connectivities associated with them, we identified disorder-specific functional connectivity patterns correlated with the PGRSs for these disorders in two independent general populations. From an imaging genetics perspective, our findings revealed disorder specificity at the genetic and neural connectivity level, shed light on the distinct pathophysiologies of these major psychiatric disorders, and supported their clinical and genetic heterogeneity. These results further support the contribution of genetic factors in the development of neural circuits and the risk for psychiatric disorders.
Using two independent datasets, we found shared functional connectivity alterations related to the cross-disorder PGRSs and specific functional connectivity patterns associated with the PGRSs for these disorders. However, some issues need to be considered in future studies. First, although we applied the same data processing procedures, differences existed in the raw data because they were acquired using different scanners from different sites. This may help explain why we did not find consistent specific functional patterns associated with the PGRS for ADHD and MDD. Next, we have conducted quality control, but there may be still some noise in the data. The different results across P-thresholds may reflect some noise in the data and the results should be viewed with caution until they are independently replicated. Additionally, more samples would increase the statistical power of our study. In our study, the voxel-wise statistical results were corrected for multiple comparisons using the “AlphaSim” implemented in REST, based on the Monte Carlo simulation in AFNI. The AlphaSim algorithm implemented in REST is widely used to correct multiple comparisons in previous studies. Since the subjects in our research were all healthy individuals, their differences may not have been significant enough to survive a more stringent correction. Although we chose a relatively liberal multiple correction method and threshold, our results are robust because we validated them using an independent dataset by conducting conjunction analysis. Conjunction analysis, which can reduce type I error, is a powerful tool to identify typical and generic aspects of the functional architecture of the human brain among contrasts and is widely used to provide evidence of replication. Conjunction analysis is a useful method in our exploratory study. Moreover, the PGRS model does not consider the interactions between SNPs; it is an aggregative model. Interactions between the SNPs should be considered in future studies. Furthermore, the subjects used in this study were Chinese and, if the training dataset for calculating the PGRS had been Chinese, the power would have been increased. Finally, multi-modal data could be included in future studies to find both structural and functional abnormalities.
In conclusion, the present study primarily examined the shared functional connectivity patterns associated with the cross-disorder PGRSs and specific functional connectivity patterns associated with the PGRSs for five major psychiatric disorders. We used 2 independent datasets to show that robust functional connectivity patterns were associated with the cross-disorder PGRSs and the PGRSs for autism, BD, and schizophrenia and that these relationships seem to be genetically modulated. Our results appear to support the validity of the PGRS model, the genetic imaging method, and the hypothesis that polygenic risk may contribute to the main neurobiological phenotypes of psychiatric diseases. Relating the specific functional connectivity with polygenic risks may help elucidate the neurobiological pathways for these diseases.
Q-Q plot.
Supplementary Fig. 1
Clusters survived for each regression of each dataset with disorder-specific and cross-disorder PGRS at PT < 0.05, corrected by AlphaSim algorithm.
Supplementary Fig. 2
Consistent disorder-specific functional connectivity alterations associated with the PGRSs for: (A) autism (PT < 0.01), (B) autism (PT < 0.1) and (C) cross-disorder (PT < 0.1), with the bilateral insula using Datasets 1 and 2, masking by the significant voxels at PT < 0.05. The t-values are displayed. MNI coordinates are used.
Supplementary Fig. 3
The following are the supplementary data related to this article.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
Altered functioning of the executive control circuit in late-life depression: episodic and persistent phenomena
Cortical control of saccades and fixation in man A PET study
Major depressive disorder is associated with abnormal interoceptive activity and functional connectivity in the insula
Parsing pain perception between nociceptive representation and magnitude estimation
Temporal lobe and “default” hemodynamic brain modes discriminate between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Anterior insular cortex regulation in autism spectrum disorders
Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the prefrontal-striatal model
Abnormal medial prefrontal cortex resting-state connectivity in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
Aberrant development of functional connectivity among resting state-related functional networks in medication-naive ADHD children
Common polygenic risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with cognitive ability in the general population
How do you feel [mdash] now? The anterior insula and human awareness
Genetic relationship between five psychiatric disorders estimated from genome-wide SNPs
Identification of risk loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders: a genome-wide analysis
A linear complexity phasing method for thousands of genomes
Polygenic risk scores in imaging genetics: usefulness and applications
Neuroimaging and neuropathological studies of depression: implications for the cognitive-emotional features of mood disorders
Power and predictive accuracy of polygenic risk scores
Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-functioning participants with autism spectrum disorder
Executive functions and their disorders: imaging in clinical neuroscience
Neural mechanisms of a genome-wide supported psychosis variant
PRSice: polygenic risk score software
Spontaneous neural activity in the right superior temporal gyrus and left middle temporal gyrus is associated with insight level in obsessive-compulsive disorder
Genome-wide association studies in ADHD
Multisubject fMRI studies and conjunction analyses
Aberrant “default mode” functional connectivity in schizophrenia
Impaired insight into illness and cognitive insight in schizophrenia spectrum disorders: resting state functional connectivity
Genome-wide association studies of autism
Identification of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness
The bipolar disorder risk allele at CACNA1C also confers risk of recurrent major depression and of schizophrenia
Alterations in functional activation in euthymic bipolar disorder and schizophrenia during a working memory task
High loading of polygenic risk for ADHD in children with comorbid aggression
The molecular genetic architecture of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Glutamatergic and resting-state functional connectivity correlates of severity in major depression – the role of pregenual anterior cingulate cortex and anterior insula
Common polygenic variation contributes to risk of schizophrenia that overlaps with bipolar disorder
Common polygenic variation contributes to risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Mapping the pathways of information processing from sensation to action in four distinct sensorimotor tasks
Functional and anatomical cortical underconnectivity in autism: evidence from an FMRI study of an executive function task and corpus callosum morphometry
Polygenic risk for schizophrenia associated with working memory-related prefrontal brain activation in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls
Is aberrant functional connectivity a psychosis endophenotype? A resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study
Is the ADHD brain wired differently? A review on structural and functional connectivity in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Associations between polygenic risk for schizophrenia and brain function during probabilistic learning in healthy individuals
Bipolar disorders, dystonia, and compulsion after dysfunction of the cerebellum, dentatorubrothalamic tract, and substantia nigra
Widespread functional disconnectivity in schizophrenia with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging
Altered resting-state Frontoparietal control network in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
The impact of MIR137 on dorsolateral prefrontal-hippocampal functional connectivity in healthy subjects
DISC1 Ser704Cys impacts thalamic-prefrontal connectivity
Polygenic risk for schizophrenia influences cortical gyrification in 2 independent general populations
Remembering familiar people: the posterior cingulate cortex and autobiographical memory retrieval
A mega-analysis of genome-wide association studies for major depressive disorder
Resting state functional connectivity of five neural networks in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
Insular dysfunction within the salience network is associated with severity of symptoms and aberrant inter-network connectivity in major depressive disorder
Aberrant dependence of default mode/central executive network interactions on anterior insular salience network activity in schizophrenia
A new multipoint method for genome-wide association studies by imputation of genotypes
Saliency, switching, attention and control: a network model of insula function
Neural connectivity as an intermediate phenotype: brain networks under genetic control
Defining a left-lateralized response specific to intelligible speech using fMRI
Default mode network abnormalities in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
Reality distortion is related to the structure of the salience network in schizophrenia
Population structure and eigenanalysis
Altered structural and functional thalamocortical networks in secondarily generalized extratemporal lobe seizures
Functional Neuroanatomy of emotion: a meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI
Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies
Large-scale genome-wide association analysis of bipolar disorder identifies a new susceptibility locus near ODZ4
PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses
The superior temporal sulcus performs a common function for social and speech perception: implications for the emergence of autism
Genome-wide association analysis identifies 13 new risk loci for schizophrenia
Genetic risk for autism spectrum disorders and neuropsychiatric variation in the general population
Polygenic dissection of diagnosis and clinical dimensions of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
Genome-wide association study identifies five new schizophrenia loci
The angular gyrus: multiple functions and multiple subdivisions
REST: a toolkit for resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data processing
A critical role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between central-executive and default-mode networks
Shared genetic influences between attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) traits in children and clinical ADHD
Altered brain activation during emotional face processing in relation to both diagnosis and polygenic risk of bipolar disorder
The international HapMap project web site
Altered resting-state functional connectivity patterns of anterior cingulate cortex in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Brain connectivity in psychiatric imaging genetics
The anterior insula in autism: under-connected and under-examined
Salience network–based classification and prediction of symptom severity in children with autism
No evidence that common genetic risk variation is shared between schizophrenia and autism
Prefrontal inefficiency is associated with polygenic risk for schizophrenia
The influence of polygenic risk for bipolar disorder on neural activation assessed using fMRI
Impact of cross-disorder polygenic risk on frontal brain activation with specific effect of schizophrenia risk
Aberrant salience network (bilateral insula and anterior cingulate cortex) connectivity during information processing in schizophrenia
Bipolar polygenic loading and bipolar spectrum features in major depressive disorder
Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data
Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R.A., Nichols, T.E., Van Essen, D.C., Wager, T.D., NeuroSynth: a new platform for large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Front. Neuroinform.
Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI
