Neural responses to negative outcomes predict success in community-based substance use treatment
Background and aims
Activation in some specific brain regions has demonstrated promise as prognostic indicators in substance dependent individuals (SDIs) but this issue has not yet been explored in SDIs attending typical of community-based treatment. We used a data-driven, exploratory approach to identify brain-based predictors of treatment outcome in a representative community sample of SDIs. The predictive utility of brain-based measures was evaluated against clinical indicators, cognitive-behavioral performance, and self-report assessments.
Design
Prospective clinical outcome design, evaluating baseline functional magnetic resonance imaging data from the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) as a predictor of 3-month substance use treatment outcomes.
Setting
Community-based substance use programs in Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
Participants
Twenty-three SDIs (17 male, ages 18–43) in an intensive outpatient or residential treatment program; abstinent 1–4 weeks at baseline.
Measurements
Event-related brain response, BART performance, and self-report scores at treatment onset, substance use outcome measure (based on days of use)
Findings
Using voxel-level predictive modeling and leave-one-out cross-validation, an elevated response to unexpected negative feedback in bilateral amygdala and anterior hippocampus (Amyg/aHipp) at baseline successfully predicted greater substance use over the 3-month study interval (p ≤ 0.006, cluster-corrected). This effect was robust to inclusion of significant non-brain-based covariates. A larger response to negative feedback in bilateral Amyg/aHipp was also associated with faster reward-seeking responses after negative feedback (r(23) = −0.544, p = 0.007; r(23) = −0.588, p = 0.003). A model including Amyg/aHipp activation, faster reward-seeking after negative feedback, and significant self-report scores accounted for 45% of the variance in substance use outcomes in our sample.
Conclusions
An elevated response to unexpected negative feedback in bilateral amygdala and anterior hippocampus (Amyg/aHipp) appears to predict relapse to substance use in people attending community-based treatment.
The majority of substance dependent individuals (SDIs) resume use within two years of treatment and as few as 4% achieve continuous abstinence. Recovery from substance use disorders (SUDs) involves a complex interaction between intrinsic and extrinsic factors including motivation, social environment, and capacity for balanced decision-making – which vary across individuals and over time. As demographic, psychosocial, clinical, and cognitive-behavioral predictors have demonstrated limited utility, attention has increasingly turned to brain-based “neuromarkers” of relapse risk.
Alterations in brain function underlie compulsive use (e.g. incentive sensitization of drug cues) and failures of self-control and these may serve as prognostic indicators in SDIs. For example, aberrant activation (e.g. hyperactivation of reward and sensory processing areas) to substance-related and non-substance-related reward cues has been associated with earlier and/or more likely relapse, as has impaired control-related processing during risky or probabilistic decision-making and other control-demanding tasks.
In line with models of stress-induced relapse, relapse risk also increases with ventromedial PFC/anterior cingulate cortex (vmPFC/ACC) hyperactivation during relaxation and hypoactivation during stress, as well as reduced functional connectivity between vmPFC/ACC and amygdala, which may reflect impaired stress and affect regulation. Risk-related structural abnormalities within prefrontal control areas and the amygdala, are also consistent with this account.
Relapse-related neuromarkers have contributed to enthusiasm for neuroimaging to enhance clinical assessment and inform personalized treatment. Several studies have demonstrated that brain-based measures outperform subjective self-reports and other traditional clinical indicators. However, as was recently identified by Whelan and Garavan, many studies fail to correct for statistical optimism when assessing brain-based predictors and may not generalize. This may be particularly problematic in studies of substance use relapse which have generally focused on a single SUD and excluded comorbid conditions, already limiting generalizability to real-world treatment settings.
SUDs commonly co-occur with internalizing psychopathology, which has also been associated with abnormal reward-processing and stress-reactivity. Relapse prediction based on naturalistic samples (i.e., including comorbid SUD and internalizing disorders) may thus reflect transdiagnostic constructs relevant to chronicity. Dysfunction of negative valence systems underlying threat and stress-reactivity, for example, may increase vulnerability to internalizing disorders and substance use compounds this effect. However, SUDs and internalizing comorbidities may also act in opposition; for example, with the former decreasing and the latter increasing error signaling. It is therefore possible that neural predictors from SUD samples without comorbidity will not effectively translate for clinical use.
The current study represents a first step toward addressing this issue by exploring neural predictors of relapse in a heterogeneous sample of SDIs, typical of community-based treatment settings. We used a Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) that concurrently measures several predictive domains (i.e., risky decision-making, reward/negative outcome processing), uses monetary incentives rather than substance-specific stimuli, and has ecological validity. Fast event-related imaging further allowed differentiation of decision-making and outcome evaluation phases of the BART. Non-brain-based measures were also assessed, against which the predictive utility of brain-based measures could be evaluated. Despite including a mixed SUD sample with representative comorbidity, we hypothesized that previous findings of increased relapse risk with impaired error signaling in ACC would replicate for negative outcomes in the BART and extend to risk-related signaling during decision-making. Due to our novel use of a community-based sample, we additionally conducted data-driven, exploratory analyses of corticolimbic circuitry to inform future work.
Methods
Design
We utilized a prospective clinical outcome design. Neuroimaging, cognitive-behavioral, and self-report measures were collected at the beginning of treatment and examined as candidate predictors of three-month substance use outcomes.
Participants
Twenty-six SDIs were enrolled upon engagement with community-based treatment and assessed within 1–4 weeks of self-reported abstinence; a sample of 23 (ages 18–43) was followed for 3 months (see Table 1 for demographic and recruitment data). Participants received treatment-as-usual through one of two abstinence-oriented, community-based addiction treatment programs (one intensive outpatient and one residential program; see Supporting Materials for additional information) and were not receiving replacement pharmacotherapy. All met DSM-IV criteria for alcohol, drug, or polysubstance dependence, without history of traumatic brain injury, neurocognitive disorders, Bipolar, or psychotic illness. An electronic breathalyzer and 6-panel urine drug screen were conducted at baseline and 3-month follow-up; behavioral signs of intoxication were also evaluated. Assessments were only conducted if blood alcohol content was 0.000 percent by volume, urinalysis was negative for illicit substances, and behavioral signs of intoxication were absent. Participants provided written informed consent; all methods were approved by the Indiana University Institutional Review Board.
fMRI Acquisition and BART Procedure
Imaging data were acquired at baseline and 3-month follow-up using a 32-channel head coil-equipped, Siemens Magnetom Trio 3-Tesla MRI scanner; follow-up data are reported elsewhere. Echo-planar gradient-echo T2*-weighted sequences of 240 whole-brain volumes measured the functional blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) response during two eight-minute blocks of BART (see Figure 1). Acquisition, task, and preprocessing parameters were identical to previous work; details provided in Supporting Information. In brief, the BART involved button-press responses to either ‘Inflate’ a balloon – incrementally and quasi-exponentially increasing its size and value in parallel with the probability of explosion – or ‘Redeem’ it for its current value. Stimuli were presented using E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA); a projector was used for display within the scanner bore. Trials began with an image of a balloon. A red rectangle was presented for 1.5–2.5 seconds, indicating to wait before responding and subsequently turned green, indicating to respond when ready. Participants responded with left or right index fingers (response-mapping counterbalanced across subjects).
Each balloon sequence began with a balloon worth $0.00. After each response, a jittered delay of 0–6 seconds preceded feedback (‘Successful_Gamble’, ‘Explode’, ‘Confirmed_Gain’) such that the BOLD response could be estimated separately for decision and outcome intervals. ‘Inflate’ responses could result in either 1) a ‘Successful_Gamble,’ whereupon the display was updated with a larger balloon and increased wager value, initiating the next decision or 2) ‘Explode’ feedback, indicating loss of the current wager. ‘Redeem’ responses always resulted in ‘Confirmed_Gain’ feedback and addition of the balloon value to block winnings (visible at bottom of screen). Participants completed an average of 95 decision trials and 16 balloon sequences per block.
Additional Measures
The timeline follow-back procedure was administered at 1-, 2-, and 3-month timepoints to document drug and alcohol use during the study interval. Narrative details of use (e.g., subjective intoxication) were also acquired. Details of the timeline follow-back procedure, as well as psychodiagnostic, self-report, and cognitive-behavioral assessments are provided in Supporting Information.
fMRI Analysis
Imaging data were analyzed using SPM5 and Matlab R2013a. BART BOLD responses were estimated using a general linear model with 20 regressors: six motion regressors, two constants, five main effect regressors (‘Redeem’, ‘Inflate’, ‘Explode’, ‘Successful_Gamble’, ‘Confirmed_Gain’), five parametric modulators representing explosion probability for each event, and 2 parametric modulators representing ‘Redeem’ and ‘Inflate’ response times (RTs). A canonical hemodynamic response function was used to model event-related signals during decision (i.e., RT) and outcome (i.e., feedback onset) intervals. Subject was included as a random effect at the second-level.
Contrasts isolated effects associated with negative outcomes over uncertain (‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’) and certain gains (‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’), decisions to pursue uncertain gains (‘Inflate – Redeem’), and decisions to pursue certain gains (‘Redeem – Inflate’), as well as regions in which trial-to-trial fluctuations in BOLD signal correlated with the probability of explosion (i.e. parametric modulators, designated by ‘*p(Explode)’). Using a cluster-forming threshold of p < 0.001, clusters of 30 or more voxels with a cluster-corrected p-value of < 0.05, were identified as regions of interest (ROIs). The cluster-extent threshold was determined using AFNI’s 3dClustSim to provide a type I error rate of α = 0.005. Two participants were excluded from the second-level ‘Explode*p(Explode)’ contrast because low explosion frequency precluded unique specification in the first-level general linear model.
Whole-brain correlational analyses were conducted for each contrast to identify regions in which task-related activity was associated with substance use during the study interval. A substance use metric (SUM) was calculated from timeline follow-back data for each participant, representing incidents of drug and alcohol use during the study, weighted by presence/absence of intoxication;1 a log-odds transformation was applied prior to analysis. This approach was chosen to better capture variability in substance use outcomes within the study sample (see Supporting Information). Next, voxel-level predictive modeling and leave-one-out cross-validation were used to identify ROIs predictive of substance use outcomes and compare performance of models based on brain- and/or non-brain-based predictors (see Supporting Information for details). Briefly, linear regression was applied with cross-validation on a voxel-by-voxel basis. Clusters wherein constituent voxels yielded predicted SUM values for left-out participants that strongly correlated with actual SUM values were targeted for further investigation. Leave-one-out cross-validation was selected for optimism-correction because this approach has been recommended for small neuroimaging datasets and used in similar work with a comparable sample size. Predictive analysis of binary treatment outcomes was also conducted using Receiver Operating Characteristic curves and is described in Supporting Information and Figure S1.
Analysis of Cognitive-behavioral and Self-Report Measures
Pearson correlations with the substance use outcome variable (i.e., SUM) were calculated for each measure. Paired t-tests and repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) were utilized for comparisons between conditions, as necessary. Statistics were computed in SPSS. Self-report and behavioral findings for cognitive-behavioral tasks other than BART are summarized in Supporting Information and Table S1.
Results
BART Performance
BART performance is summarized in Table 2. Consistent with successful performance, average winnings were $16 per block, ‘Confirmed_Gains’ occurred more often than ‘Explode’ events, and the average number of inflations prior to ‘Redeem’/’Confirmed_Gain’ events was higher than that for ‘Explode’ outcomes. The number of completed balloons, proportion of balloons ending in ‘Confirmed_Gain’ vs. ‘Explode,’ and number of inflations did not significantly differ between blocks. There were no significant effects of block or response type on RT. A higher number of inflations prior to ‘Redeem’ responses was associated with increased substance use during the study interval; this effect was significant at p = 0.046, two-tailed, (r(23) = 0.42). Average RT did not significantly correlate with SUM (r(23) = −0.23, p = 0.291).
Neural Prediction of Relapse Risk
Basic event-related and parametric modulator contrasts are described in Supporting Information and Table S2a–c. Whole-brain correlational analyses between planned contrasts and SUM values are summarized in Table 3. Contrary to our hypotheses, an elevated response to negative feedback (‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’) in right supplementary motor area (SMA), left dorsal posterior cingulate, and a region including right amygdala and anterior hippocampus (Amyg/aHipp) was associated with greater use – as was an increased BOLD response with increasing explosion probability in midline SMA during ‘Inflate’ events (i.e., Inflate*p(Explode)). A similar effect was observed in left angular gyrus and putamen for ‘Successful_Gamble*p(Explode)’ and in right insula and left SMA for ‘Explode*p(Explode).’ Greater ‘Redeem – Inflate’ activation in left IFG was associated with less use.
Given our modest sample size, correlational findings may not have external validity (see, 38). To address this, leave-one-out cross-validation was used to test outcome prediction by event-related brain signals on a voxel-by-voxel basis. Only two contrasts (‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ and ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’) revealed regions of 30 or more voxels in which predicted outcomes for left-out participants strongly correlated with actual SUM values (r ≥ 0.70) and survived cluster-level correction. For both contrasts, peak model performance (indicated by the strongest correlation between actual and predicted values) was identified in bilateral Amyg/aHipp (see Table 3, Figure 2). It is noted that the ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’ right Amyg/aHipp cluster was 29 voxels, just below our conservative, a priori threshold.
To further investigate these significant clusters, spherical ROIs (radius: 1 voxel; volume: 7 voxels) were defined around voxels associated with peak model performance in bilateral Amyg/aHipp and leave-one-out cross-validation was repeated following addition of non-brain-based measures that significantly correlated with SUM (specifically, DOSPERT Expected Benefit scores), as well as a “null” model including only non-brain-based covariates (NM1). Mean Akaike information criterion (AIC) values for each model and ROI are summarized in Table 4. Model comparison was conducted separately for each ROI; multiple brain-based predictors were not included in the same model due to collinearity concerns. Left and right ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’ ROIs and the right ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ ROI passed the model comparison test – each demonstrating a reduction in AIC following addition of the voxel-based predictor. A second null model (NM2) added covariates with p ≤ 0.125 (i.e., DOSPERT Risk Perception and Go/No-Go performance) and intuitive clinical indicators (i.e., craving scores, SUD symptom counts). Here, addition of the voxel-based predictor increased AIC (see Table 4), indicating that the brain-based measure was not supported with this expanded set of non-brain-based covariates.
Behavioral Correlates of Predictive Activation
Although not predicted in our original hypotheses, identification of Amyg/aHipp-based predictive signals may be consistent with the amygdala’s putative role in stress-induced reinstatement of drug-seeking. If unexpected negative feedback (i.e. stress) increased reward-seeking in the current paradigm, it may be evident in faster inflation responses following ‘Explode’ versus ‘Confirmed_Gain’ events. To explore this possibility, the difference in initial inflation RT between post-Explode and post-Confirmed_Gain events was calculated for each participant (M = −229 ms, SD = 225) and significantly correlated with SUM, such that greater post-explosion speeding corresponded with increased use (r(23) = −0.537, p = 0.008). In addition, a significant negative correlation between BOLD signal change and post-explosion speeding (i.e. greater activation during ‘Explode’ events associated with faster post-explosion RTs) was identified in three of four Amyg/aHipp ROIs (see Figure 2).
Leave-one-out cross-validation was again repeated with post-explosion speeding added as a significant non-brain-based covariate (NM3). Resulting AICs were lower for the null model in all four ROIs (see Table 3) but approached zero for both ROIs in right Amyg/aHipp, suggesting that improved model performance with addition of the voxel-based predictor was nearly sufficient to justify increased model complexity. For right Amyg/aHipp ROIs, the full model accounted for 45.2% and 45% of variance in substance use outcomes for ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ and ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’ contrasts, respectively. Equations for these models are provided in Supporting Information.
Discussion
This study extends previous findings that brain-based measures outperform non-brain-based measures (e.g. clinical indicators, self-reports, etc.) in predicting substance use treatment outcomes by demonstrating this effect in a mixed sample of SDIs – generally representative of community-based treatment settings with respect to psychiatric and substance use comorbidities. While our initial hypotheses were not supported, voxel-by-voxel predictive modeling specifically revealed a bilateral effect in Amyg/aHipp for negative feedback contrasts, wherein an elevated Amyg/aHipp response was associated with increased use during early recovery. This effect corresponded with faster inflation responses following negative feedback, possibly reflecting increased reward-seeking in response to negative affect – as predicted by models of stress-induced relapse.
Importantly, consistency of observations between ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ and ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’ contrasts suggests the identified effect is associated with negative feedback processing and is not a consequence of differing feedback certainty in ‘Explode’ versus ‘Confirmed_Gain’ conditions. However, our findings require replication and effects of uncertainty versus negative valence should be directly examined in future work. Taken together, a predictive model including right Amyg/aHipp response to negative feedback (from either contrast), the behavioral post-explosion speeding effect, and DOSPERT Expected Benefits scores accounted for approximately 45% of variance in substance use outcomes in our sample. These results support the utility of multimodal predictive models (including neural, behavioral, and self-report measures) to assess relapse vulnerability in community-based treatment settings.
Consistent with our findings, abnormality of the amygdala and hippocampus has been widely reported in SDIs. Reduced amygdalar and hippocampal volumes have been noted in SDIs, and smaller amygdalae have been associated with increased craving and relapse severity. Hyperactivation of the amygdala and hippocampus in SDIs has also been observed in response to stress and substance-related cues and increased resting cerebral blood flow to posterior hippocampus has been associated with greater relapse risk. Amygdala activation has similarly been associated with poorer treatment outcomes, as well as increased cue-induced craving. Importantly, the amygdala is integral to the aversive experience of monetary loss, as well as negative affect more generally, suggesting that a stronger experience of negative outcomes may contribute to greater substance use in the current study.
The amygdala has similarly been implicated in animal models of stress-induced relapse and in the “frustration effect” – wherein response speed increases following reward omission. With respect to the latter, a similar effect (i.e. increased inflation speed following explosions) was significantly correlated with both substance use outcomes and activation of Amyg/aHipp ROIs in the current study. Behaviorally, this phenomenon is similar to “loss-chasing” in pathological gamblers, which has also been linked to amygdala in animal models. Gambling disorder was not assessed herein but is commonly comorbid with SUDs and may share similar neurobiological substrates.
Amygdala has further been implicated in individual differences in risky reward-seeking by the triadic model of motivated behavior, wherein different neurodevelopmental trajectories of the striatal approach system, amygdala-based avoidance system, and prefrontal control system underlie cognitive-behavioral changes during adolescence. In line with predictions of this model, problematic alcohol use has been associated with a striatal-amygdalar imbalance – precipitating alcohol use disorder when relative amygdalar hyperactivity is potentiated by stress. Consistent with current findings, stress has also been shown to increase functional connectivity between the amygdala and dorsal striatum which may drive a shift toward faster, more impulsive responding. However, while greater dorsal striatal ‘Successful_Gamble*p(Explode)’ signal positively correlated with substance use in the current study, neither ventral nor dorsal striatal ROIs were identified by voxel-wise predictive modeling.
Taken together, the current results add to converging evidence in support of amygdala-based models of stress-induced relapse. Susceptibility to stress-induced relapse is state-dependent, making it challenging to characterize through conventional psychometric approaches. A reliable brain-based predictor of stress-induced relapse would have a significant translational impact but has not previously been described for a naturalistic sample wherein vulnerability to relapse is shaped, in part, by psychiatric comorbidity. Recent evidence suggests that amygdala reactivity predicts a fundamental vulnerability to life stress that may predispose individuals to internalizing disorders, as well as SUDs. In effect, previous exclusion of comorbid presentations may have precluded identification of amygdala-based neuroprognostic indicators. However, by extension, the current findings may not generalize to those with unimorbid SUDs.
Importantly, neural predictors may also inform development of novel interventions and individualized treatment approaches. Antagonism of corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) may dampen the stress response in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and amygdala and has been shown to attenuate stress-induced relapse in rats. Evidence-based cognitive-behavioral interventions may also prevent relapse by altering neural pathways associated with stress responsivity and negative affect. In addition, interventions that upregulate dlPFC function (e.g., cognitive reappraisal, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), and transcranial direct current stimulation) may improve regulation of amygdala reactivity. Indeed, rTMS over left dlPFC has been shown to reduce subjective craving and improve control of compulsive substance use.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to utilize cross-validation of voxel-wise predictive modeling with a continuous substance use outcome variable. This method uniquely identified ROIs in bilateral Amyg/aHipp associated with negative feedback. By comparison, whole-brain correlation analyses identified several additional predictive clusters and only a single ROI in right Amyg/aHipp for ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain.’ Small volume correction for bilateral amygdala and hippocampus was sufficient to identify clusters approaching cluster-corrected significance in left Amyg/aHipp for both ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ (x = −34, y = −20, z = −18; cluster size: 18; t(21) = 4.30, p = 0.057) and ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’ (x = −32, y = −4, z = −20; cluster size: 26; t(21) = 4.50, p = 0.046) contrasts. However, this bilateral effect would have been overlooked if analyses were limited to whole-brain correlations.
The current study has several limitations. Our modest sample size precluded systematic investigation of sex differences which may exist in neuropredictive signals. In addition, while we made efforts to identify generalizable predictive signals (e.g. monetary incentives rather than substance-related cues, leave-one-out cross-validation), we were unable to explore SUD subgroups or specific comorbidities. Moreover, we did not have a matched healthy control group, so we cannot conclude that predictive signals localized to Amyg/aHipp are elevated relative to individuals without SUDs, although this view is supported by existing evidence.
The current study represents the first effort to identify neuropredictive indicators of relapse risk in a naturalistic sample of SDIs, typical of community-based treatment. We identified ROIs in bilateral Amyg/aHipp as significantly predictive of substance use outcomes, even when controlling for significant non-brain-based covariates. In addition, a novel behavioral correlate of relapse risk – faster reward-seeking responses after negative feedback – was also identified. Results of the current study may have translational relevance to the development of multimodal assessment tools and targeted interventions for individuals at the highest risk of relapse.
Supplementary Material
(Total Days Monitored/4)*[Days Alcohol Used without Intoxication + 2*(Days Alcohol Used with Intoxication) + Days Drugs Used without Intoxication + 2*(Days Drugs Used with Intoxication)]
Competing Interests: None declared
Author Contributions: PRF, JWB, and SEF were responsible for the study design and concept. SEF performed all data preprocessing and analysis. SEF, JWB, and PRF contributed to the interpretation of results. SEF drafted the manuscript. SEF, JWB, and PRF participated in revision of the manuscript. All authors critically reviewed content and approved the final version for publication. SEF had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
REFERENCES
The long-term course of treated alcoholism: II. Predictors and correlates of 10-year functioning and mortality
Overview of 5-year followup outcomes in the drug abuse treatment outcome studies (DATOS)
Patterns of outcome: drinking histories over ten years among a group of alcoholics
Stages and processes of self-change of smoking: toward an integrative model of change
Predicting treatment outcome in stimulant dependence
Prediction as a humanitarian and pragmatic contribution from human cognitive neuroscience
Dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex in addiction: neuroimaging findings and clinical implications
Effect of brain structure, brain function, and brain connectivity on relapse in alcohol-dependent patients
Alcohol-associated stimuli activate the ventral striatum in abstinent alcoholics
Cue-induced activation of the striatum and medial prefrontal cortex is associated with subsequent relapse in abstinent alcoholics
Cue-induced brain activity changes and relapse in cocaine-dependent patients
Individual differences in anterior cingulate activation associated with attentional bias predict cocaine use after treatment
Prospective associations between brain activation to cocaine and no-go cues and cocaine relapse
Predicting subsequent relapse by drug-related cue-induced brain activation in heroin addiction: an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study
Predicting the future relapse of alcohol-dependent patients from structural and functional brain images
Pavlovian-to-instrumental transfer effects in the nucleus accumbens relate to relapse in alcohol dependence
An initial study of neural responses to monetary incentives as related to treatment outcome in cocaine dependence
Cocaine dependent individuals with attenuated striatal activation during reinforcement learning are more susceptible to relapse
Striatum and insula dysfunction during reinforcement learning differentiates abstinent and relapsed methamphetamine-dependent individuals
Individualized relapse prediction: Personality measures and striatal and insular activity during reward-processing robustly predict relapse
Attenuated insular processing during risk predicts relapse in early abstinent methamphetamine-dependent individuals
Neural activation patterns of methamphetamine-dependent subjects during decision making predict relapse
Pretreatment brain activation during stroop task is associated with outcomes in cocaine-dependent patients
Cannabis abstinence during treatment and one-year follow-up: relationship to neural activity in men
Error processing and gender-shared and -specific neural predictors of relapse in cocaine dependence
Error-related brain activity predicts cocaine use after treatment at 3-month follow-up
Increased neural activity during high working memory load predicts low relapse risk in alcohol dependence
Review. Neurobiological mechanisms for opponent motivational processes in addiction, Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B
Extinction circuits for fear and addiction overlap in prefrontal cortex
Peripheral and prefrontal stress system markers and risk of relapse in alcoholism
Disrupted ventromedial prefrontal function, alcohol craving, and subsequent relapse risk
Cortico-amygdala coupling as a marker of early relapse risk in cocaine-addicted individuals
Brain morphology at entry into treatment for alcohol dependence is related to relapse propensity
Cortical thickness, surface area, and volume of the brain reward system in alcohol dependence: relationships to relapse and extended abstinence, Alcoholism
Association of frontal and posterior cortical gray matter volume with time to alcohol relapse: a prospective study
Frontal white matter integrity predictors of adult alcohol treatment outcome
Amygdala volume associated with alcohol abuse relapse and craving
When optimism hurts: inflated predictions in psychiatric neuroimaging
Peril and pleasure: an rdoc-inspired examination of threat responses and reward processing in anxiety and depression
A neural biomarker of psychological vulnerability to future life stress
Neural Reactivity to Emotional Stimuli Prospectively Predicts the Impact of a Natural Disaster on Psychiatric Symptoms in Children
Clinical neuroprediction: Amygdala reactivity predicts depressive symptoms 2 years later
Substance use modulates stress reactivity: Behavioral and physiological outcomes
The error-related negativity (ERN) and psychopathology: toward an endophenotype
Risk-taking but not response inhibition or delay discounting predict alcohol consumption in social drinkers
Decision making in the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART): anterior cingulate cortex signals loss aversion but not the infrequency of risky choices, Cognitive
A preliminary study of longitudinal neuroadaptation associated with recovery from addiction
Cognitive control links alcohol use, trait disinhibition, and reduced cognitive capacity: Evidence for medial prefrontal cortex dysregulation during reward-seeking behavior
Predicting IQ change from brain structure: a cross-validation study
Subcortical correlates of craving in recently abstinent alcoholic patients
Basal Hippocampal Activity and Its Functional Connectivity Predicts Cocaine Relapse
Posterior hippocampal regional cerebral blood flow predicts abstinence: a replication study
Neural activity related to drug craving in cocaine addiction
Brain activation to cocaine cues and motivation/treatment status
Limbic activation during cue-induced cocaine craving
Effects of cognitive bias modification training on neural alcohol cue reactivity in alcohol dependence
Activation of memory circuits during cue-elicited cocaine craving
Different contributions of the human amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex to decision-making
Predictors of amygdala activation during the processing of emotional stimuli: a meta-analysis of 385 PET and fMRI studies
Limbic lesions and the energizing, aversive, and inhibitory effects of non-reward in rats
Lesions in the amygdala and the frustration effect
Chasing, arousal and sensation seeking in off-course gamblers
The compulsive gambler’s spiral of options and involvement
Dissociable effects of basolateral amygdala lesions on decision making biases in rats when loss or gain is emphasized, Cognitive
The functional anatomy of impulse control disorders
The triadic model perspective for the study of adolescent motivated behavior
Divergent responses of the amygdala and ventral striatum predict stress-related problem drinking in young adults: possible differential markers of affective and impulsive pathways of risk for alcohol use disorder
Blocking the mineralocorticoid receptor in humans prevents the stress-induced enhancement of centromedial amygdala connectivity with the dorsal striatum
What neuroimaging has and has not yet added to our understanding of addiction
Brain imaging biomarkers to predict relapse in alcohol addiction
CP-154,526, a selective, non-peptide antagonist of the corticotropin-releasing factor1 receptor attenuates stress-induced relapse to drug seeking in cocaine- and heroin-trained rats
Retraining the addicted brain: a review of hypothesized neurobiological mechanisms of mindfulness-based relapse prevention
Cognitive reappraisal of emotion: a meta-analysis of human neuroimaging studies
Right prefrontal HF-rTMS attenuates right amygdala processing of negatively valenced emotional stimuli in healthy females
Improving working memory: the effect of combining cognitive activity and anodal transcranial direct current stimulation to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation: a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion
Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation to Treat Substance Use Disorders and Compulsive Behavior
Gender differences in cardiovascular and corticoadrenal response to stress and drug cues in cocaine dependent individuals
Sex differences in brain activation during stress imagery in abstinent cocaine users: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study
The neural correlates of cue-induced craving in cocaine-dependent women
Schematic representation of the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART), reproduced, with permission, from.
Correlation between the BOLD response to negative feedback in predictive regions identified through leave-one-out cross-validation analysis and the post-explosion speeding effect. ROIs identified in the leave-one-out cross-validation analysis for both contrasts include voxels in left and right amygdala and anterior hippocampus. Scatterplots depict mean BOLD response within spherical ROIs (radius = 1 voxel) defined around the maximally predictive voxel for each contrast (38, −16, −16 for ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ and −34, −4, −22 for ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’) versus post-explosion speeding (i.e. Post-Explosion RT – Post-Confirmed_Gain RT). Mean BOLD responses in left and right Amyg/aHipp ROIs for the ‘Explode – Confirmed_Gain’ contrast significantly correlated with post-explosion speeding (r(23) = −0.544, p = 0.007 and r(23) = −0.588, p = 0.003, respectively), indicating that a stronger response to negative feedback was associated with a greater reduction in post-explosion RT. The left ROI for the ‘Explode – Successful_Gamble’ contrast also significantly correlated with post-explosion speeding (r(23) = −0.496, p = 0.016) but the right ROI did not (r(23) = −0.345, p = 0.107).
Summary of demographic, recruitment, and clinical characteristics of study sample (n = 23).
Demographic Variables†		Mean (SD) or Count	 	  Age		27 (6.5)	 	  Male		17	 	  Total Years of Education		13 (1.8)	 	  Employment Status	Employed Full Time	6	 		Employed Part Time	6	 		Unemployed	9	 		Student	2	 		 	Recruitment Information		Count	 	  Treatment Setting	Outpatient	14	 		Residential	9	 	  Referral Source	Self	13	 		Drug Court	5	 		Probation	5	 		 	Clinical Variables		Mean (SD) or Count	 	  Times in Previous Treatment		2 (2.4)	 	  Primary DSM-IV Diagnosis	Alcohol dependence	13	 		Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Dependence	1	 		Cannabis dependence	1	 		Amphetamine dependence	1	 		Opioid dependence	3	 		Polysubstance dependence	4	 	  Additional Psychiatric Diagnoses	Major Depressive Disorder	4	 		Dysthymic Disorder	1	 		Generalized Anxiety Disorder	4	 		Posttraumatic Stress Disorder	1	 		Anxiety Disorder NOS	2	 		Antisocial Personality Disorder	1	 		None	7	 		 	Substance Use Outcomes		Mean (SD)	 		Substance Use Metric	0.64 (0.12)	 		% Days of Use	12.8 (24.2)	 		% Days Use to Intoxication	9.6 (16.0)	 	
The Substance Use Metric (SUM)) did not significantly correlate with demographic factors, age (r(23) = −0.171, p = 0.435) and years of education (r(23) = −0.332, p = 0.122), and did not significantly differ with respect to sex (t(22) = 2.08, p = 0.222) or employment status (F(3,19) = 0.67, p = 0.581).
Summary of Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART) behavioral performance measures (n = 23).
		Confirmed_Gain	Explode	All	Confirmed_Gainvs. Explodet-value (p-value)	 		 	# ofBalloons		21 (5.4)	11.7 (4)	32.7 (3.1)	4.78 (< 0.001)	 		 	InflationCount (#)	Mean (SD)	6.3 (0.7)	5.2 (0.6)	5.9 (0.5)	9.77 (< 0.001)	 	Range	2–10	2–9	2–10	n/a	 		Within Subject SD	1.0	1.3	1.3	n/a	 		 			Redeem	Inflate	All	F-value (p-value)	 		 	ResponseTime (ms)	Mean (SD)	1,018 (732)	1,044 (445)	1,037 (463)	n/a	 			Main Effect: Block	1.55 (0.226)	 			Main Effect: Response Type	0.08 (0.782)	 			Block × Response Type Interaction	1.90 (0.182)	 	
Regions of interest from whole-brain correlation analysis of substance use outcomes and leave-one-out cross-validation analysis.
Negative Correlation: Greater Activation Associated with Less Use	Peak MNICoordinates			 		 	Contrast	Region	Size	x	y	z	T-value	p-value (cluster- corrected)	 		 	Redeem – Inflate	L Inferior Frontal Gyrus (BA 45/47)	105	−46	24	8	5.23	0.019	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Redeem*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Inflate*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Explode*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Successful_Gamble*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Confirmed_Gain*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 		 	Positive Correlation: Greater Activation Associated with More Use	Peak MNICoordinates			 		 	Contrast	Region	Size	x	y	z	T-value	p-value (cluster- corrected)	 		 	Redeem – Inflate	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	R Supplementary Motor Area (BA 6)	222	14	−26	62	5.55	< 0.001	 		R Amygdala/Anterior Hippocampus	341	34	−22	−16	5.54	< 0.001	 		L Dorsal Posterior Cingulate (subgyral)	148	−24	−30	46	5.37	0.001	 	Redeem*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 	Inflate*p(Explode)	L/R Supplementary Motor Area (BA 6)	132	−8	0	68	5.61	0.003	 	Explode*p(Explode)	R Insula (BA 13)	56	36	4	12	4.41	0.042	 		L Supplementary Motor Area (BA 6)	74	−12	−12	60	3.91	0.010	 	Successful_Gamble*p(Explode)	L Angular Gyrus (BA 39)	149	−40	−82	30	5.90	0.001	 		L Putamen	83	−26	10	−4	3.78	0.028	 	Confirmed_Gain*p(Explode)	n/a	-	-	-	-	-	-	 		 	Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation Analysis	Peak MNICoordinates			 		 			Size	x	y	z	Meanr-value†	p-value (cluster-corrected)	 		 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	L Amygdala/Anterior Hippocampus	38	−34	−4	−22	0.77	< 0.001	 		R Amygdala/Anterior Hippocampus	29	34	−20	−16	0.78	0.006	 	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	L Amygdala/Anterior Hippocampus	38	−34	−8	−26	0.80	< 0.001	 		R Amygdala/Anterior Hippocampus	33	38	−16	−16	0.80	0.002	 	
Reported r-values reflect the mean of voxel-level correlation coefficients for each cluster, representing the relationship between actual and predicted SUM values for the left-out participant. Correlation coefficients are provided as descriptive rather than inferential statistics and corresponding p-values are omitted. Reported p-values reflect whole-brain cluster-level correction to account for multiple comparisons.
Summary of predictive model performance in peak ROIs identified through leave-one-out cross-validation analysis (n = 23)
			Null Model	Voxel Only Model	Voxel Model withCovariates	 	Voxel ModelComparison	Contrast	Peak MNICoordinates	AIC	R2	Voxel Modelr-value†	MeanR2	MeanAIC	MeanAICDiff†	MeanR2†	 	PeakVoxel	ROIMean	 		 	NM1: Model withSignificant Covariates	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	−34	−8	−26	44.09	0.141	0.93	0.81	0.116	46.78	−2.69	0.113	 	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	38	−16	−16	44.09	0.141	0.96	0.80	0.226	42.13	1.96	0.306	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	−34	−4	−22	44.09	0.141	0.92	0.75	0.287	40.59	3.50	0.370	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	34	−20	−16	44.09	0.141	0.88	0.64	0.368	41.11	2.98	0.349	 		 	NM2: Model withSignificant & TrendingCovariates + ClinicalIndices	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	−34	−8	−26	52.04	0.144	0.93	0.81	0.116	58.50	−6.46	−0.042	 	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	38	−16	−16	52.04	0.144	0.96	0.80	0.226	56.73	−4.69	0.032	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	−34	−4	−22	52.04	0.144	0.92	0.75	0.287	54.63	−2.59	0.119	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	34	−20	−16	52.04	0.144	0.88	0.64	0.368	53.57	−1.53	0.163	 		 	NM3: Model withSignificant Covariates+ Post-ExplosionSpeeding	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	−34	−8	−26	40.10	0.390	0.93	0.81	0.116	43.68	−3.58	0.325	 	Explode – Confirmed_Gain	38	−16	−16	40.10	0.390	0.96	0.80	0.226	40.63	−0.53	0.452	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	−34	−4	−22	40.10	0.390	0.92	0.75	0.287	41.21	−1.11	0.427	 	Explode – Successful_Gamble	34	−20	−16	40.10	0.390	0.88	0.64	0.368	40.67	−0.57	0.450	 	
Reported r-values represent the correlation between actual and predicted SUM values for the left-out participant.
A positive mean AIC diff indicates that the addition of a voxel-based predictor was preferred despite constraints to limit model complexity.
R2 = 1 – (SSEResidual / SSETotal), where SSEResidual reflects the sum of squared differences between actual and predicted values for each left-out participant and SSETotal reflects the sum of squared differences between actual values for each left-out participant and the average of all actual values. Given our leave-one-out cross validation approach, a reduced (or negative) R2 for the full model reflects overfitting on the basis of training data, which can worsen performance on the independent test set.
