Unseen scars: Cocaine patients with prior trauma evidence heightened resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) between the amygdala and limbic-striatal regions
Background
Substance use disorder (SUD) patients with a history of trauma exhibit poorer treatment outcome, greater functional impairment and higher risk for relapse. Endorsement of prior trauma has, in several SUD populations, been linked to abnormal functional connectivity (FC) during task-based studies. We examined amygdala FC in the resting state (RS), testing for differences between cocaine patients with and without prior trauma.
Methods
Patients with cocaine use disorder (CUD; n=34) were stabilized in an inpatient setting prior to a BOLD fMRI scan. Responses to Addiction Severity Index and the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview were used to characterize the No-Trauma (n=16) and Trauma (n=18) groups. Seed-based RSFC was conducted using the right and left amygdala as regions of interest. Examination of amygdala RSFC was restricted to an a priori anatomical mask that incorporated nodes of the limbic-striatal motivational network.
Results
RSFC was compared for the Trauma versus No-Trauma groups. The Trauma group evidenced greater connectivity between the amygdala and the a priori limbic-striatal mask. Peaks within the statistically significant limbic-striatal mask included the amygdala, putamen, pallidum, caudate, thalamus, insula, hippocampus/parahippocampus, and brain stem.
Conclusions
Results suggest that cocaine patients with prior trauma (versus without) have heightened communication within nodes of the motivational network, even at rest. To our knowledge, this is the first fMRI study to examine amygdala RSFC among those with CUD and trauma history. Heightened RSFC intralimbic connectivity for the Trauma group may reflect a relapse-relevant brain vulnerability and a novel treatment target for this clinically-challenging population.
1. Introduction
Drug addiction is a vital public health concern that exacts a tremendous toll on the brain. Interestingly, even when patients carry the same substance use disorder (SUD) diagnosis, there is much heterogeneity. Some individuals experience a lifelong struggle with addiction while others respond favorably to treatment. Elucidating the individual differences that underlie such striking variance is key to advancing treatment efforts. One critical factor to consider in understanding individual differences in SUD is prior trauma exposure, which is very common in addiction. As many as 60–90% of treatment seeking SUD patients have experienced a traumatic event. Co-occurring SUDs and trauma associate with a number of functional impairments, greater rates of relapse, higher treatment costs, poorer outcomes (social functioning, treatment adherence, and drug use) than for those with SUD alone.
1.1. Trauma Exposure and Brain Function
Certain brain regions are especially sensitive to the stress of trauma exposure. Neuroimaging research links traumatic stress to hyperactivity in the amygdala, a structure responsible for processing emotions, fear learning, and orchestrating reactions to environmental threats. In addition to mediating fear responses, the amygdala processes motivational salience underlying reward relevant goals related to appetitive stimuli. Broadly speaking, impairments observed following trauma exposure have been reflected in amygdala hyperactivity to biologically relevant motivational stimuli (i.e., appetitive or aversive).
1.2. Addiction and Brain Function
Parallel research within the field of addiction also underscores the importance of an over-responsive motivational neural network. For example, findings published by our own and other research laboratories examining addiction, have demonstrated that drug cues activate motivational-reward neural circuitry, including the amygdala. Accumulating research suggests that chronic stimulant use leads to mesolimbic hyper-responsiveness to drugs and drug cues as well as other evocative (appetitive and aversive) stimuli. The increased response to acute phasic stimuli (e.g., drugs, cues) may actually occur in the context of an overall down-regulation or tonic decrease of the motivational circuit.
1.3 Motivational Circuitry: Trauma and Drugs of Abuse
Alterations in the mesolimbic brain reward circuitry among chronic drug users and among trauma-exposed individuals have striking parallels. Both animal and human studies demonstrate that acute stress causes the brain to focus on the most salient and proximal motivational stimulus (the stressor) – shifting attention and resources away from other flexible goal-directed behavior. These findings have parallels in SUD populations; for example, cocaine patients exposed to stress show greater attentional bias toward drug cues, a highly salient motivational stimulus. Thus, exposure to trauma triggers activity within mesolimbic motivational circuits, enhancing the response to both aversive and appetitive stimuli. Though these prior studies have used a “phasic” cue to probe the motivational circuitry, the current study complements this research by examining the “tonic” resting-state of this circuitry – without the use of an explicit cue.
Although prior studies have used positron emission tomography (PET) to examine resting regional perfusion in PTSD Veterans with cocaine and alcohol abuse history, the earlier technology did not permit assessment of dynamic functional connectivity among nodes of motivational neurocircuitry. These studies detected increased resting perfusion in patients versus controls in the amygdala, but the difference was no longer significant after controlling for multiple comparisons. These early PET studies highlight the need for formal examination of amygdala resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) with the new technology of BOLD fMRI.
1.4. Resting-State Functional Connectivity (RSFC)
Prior neuroscience research examining trauma exposure and drug addiction has often used provocation paradigms (e.g., exposure to appetitive drug or aversive fear stimuli). However, recent research highlights resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) as a unique and complementary tool for understanding brain vulnerability. RSFC measures the strength of the temporal correlation of low-frequency blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) fluctuations between discrete anatomical regions when individuals are not engaged in cognitively demanding tasks (e.g., instructed to close eyes and not think of anything in particular). RSFC confers an enhanced signal-to-noise ratio over traditional task-based designs, and may circumvent potential limitations of task-based studies (e.g., practice effects). Importantly, RSFC can be used to distinguish distinctive brain states and to distinguish individuals with and without psychiatric disorders, including SUDs 
Previous RSFC studies have linked amygdala connectivity to prior trauma exposure and stress, with enhanced functional coupling of the amygdala with regions of the insula and anterior cingulate cortex. Cocaine use disorder (CUD) patients also evidence “heightened coupling” of RSFC signatures, with the amygdala exhibiting stronger connectivity with nodes of the motivational circuitry including the caudate, putamen, nucleus accumbens, and insula. Though RSFC has promise for characterizing dysfunctional neural circuitry in addiction, the findings across CUD studies are not always consistent. Some of the inconsistences may be due to important historical variables such as trauma exposure, a relatively understudied variable in the context of brain imaging in CUD. Given the high frequency of trauma exposure among those with CUD, we plan to test RSFC in CUD patients with and without trauma. We hypothesize that CUD patients with prior trauma (versus those without) will evidence increased RSFC between the amygdala and nodes of the mesolimbic motivational circuitry (i.e., amygdala, caudate nucleus, putamen, pallidum, and insula). To our knowledge, this has not been previously examined.
2. Methods
2.1 Participants
Participants were 34 treatment-seeking, cocaine-dependent men, between 34 and 60 years of age, who met DSM-IV criteria for cocaine dependence, described smoking as their primary route of cocaine-crack administration, and reported using cocaine on at least 8 of the 30 days before screening (See Table 1 for demographics). Participants were recruited through advertisements in local media and were part of a larger study examining brain and behavioral vulnerabilities associated with addiction. After completing a detailed telephone screen, participants provided informed consent, were medically screened, and completed psychological assessment measures.
Exclusion criteria included: contraindications for fMRI (e.g., metal in the body, claustrophobia), use of medications affecting central dopaminergic neurotransmission, history of psychosis, seizures, or organic brain syndrome unrelated to cocaine use, clinically significant cardiovascular, hematologic, hepatic, renal, neurological, or endocrine abnormalities, history of head trauma or loss of consciousness for more than 3 minutes. Psychiatric diagnoses were based on the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) and those diagnosed with comorbid Axis I disorders were excluded, with exception for dependence on nicotine, marijuana, or alcohol not requiring medical detoxification. Participants meeting diagnostic criteria for depression were not excluded if their diagnosis was linked solely to periods of cocaine use/cessation. This study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board.
2.2. Study Design
Participants were stabilized in a supervised drug-free residential stabilization unit for 7–10 days prior to participating in a one-hour fMRI scanning session involving several experimental tasks including a BOLD resting state scan, which preceded the behavioral tasks. This controlled setting eliminates the impact of cocaine intoxication and minimizes the contribution of cessation symptoms to study measures.
2.3. Measures
Cocaine and other illicit drug use for the past 30 days were assessed with the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) and the Timeline Followback interview (TLFB). Presence of psychiatric diagnosis was based on results from the MINI. To assess for recent anxiety and depression, additional measures included the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), and the clinician administered, Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D). The PTSD Checklist for Civilians (PCL-C) was also administered to characterize symptoms that may accompany trauma exposure as a potential clinical validator for the Trauma subgroup. Participants completed measures during their initial screening assessment (PCL-C, MINI, ASI) and their baseline visit (BAI, BDI, HAM-D, TLFB).
2.4. fMRI Acquisition
Functional MR imaging was conducted on a 3-T whole-body scanner (Siemens Tim Trio, Erlangen, Germany). High-resolution structural images were acquired for spatial brain normalization using a 3D magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence (TR/TE/TI = 1620/3/950ms). Images for the resting-scan were acquired during a 6-min scan using a gradient-echo echo-planar-imaging sequence (TR/TE = 2s/30ms, FOV = 220x220 mm2, matrix = 64x64, slice thickness = 4.5 mm, 150 images were acquired). Participants were asked to remain still with their eyes open and to not think about anything in particular during this scan.
Data preprocessing was carried out using Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI Basic Edition (DPARSF) and Data Processing and Analysis of Brain Imaging (REST) toolbox, based on SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) run under Matlab R2015 environment. In this paper, we followed the standard preprocessing pipeline still accounting for motion related artifacts. Each participants’ images were slice-time corrected, realigned, coregistered to high-resolution structural images, and subsequently normalized to MNI standard space and smoothed with the FWHM kernel of 6mm. Summary motion statistics for each subject were examined and confirmed the motion was below 2mm in both directions. In addressing the head motion concerns, we regressed out Friston 24 head motion parameters which includes six head motion estimates from current time point (Rt = [X Y Z pitch roll yaw]) , six head motion parameters from immediately preceding time point (Rt-1) and their corresponding squares(Rt 2, Rt-1 2). Given the concerns of the field about the impact of micro motion (as small as 0.2 mm) on resting functional connectivity, we additionally calculated mean Frame-by-Frame head displacement (FD) to compare the two groups and for subsequent use as a nuisance covariate at the second level analysis (see below). Images were then detrended to remove linear trends due to scanner drift; band-pass filtered (0.01–0.1Hz) to remove scanner and cardio-respiratory noise. Tissue based signals such as white matter, CSF and global signal were used as nuisance regressors to remove the sources of spurious variance and their temporal derivatives were also removed from the data through linear regression. Smoothed normalized images were entered into seed-based region of interest (ROI) analysis with amygdalae as seeds. A cross-correlation map was constructed by doing voxel-wise correlation between the temporal signals from both the right and left amygdala and each voxel in the brain. The right and left amygdalae were selected as ROIs (AAL atlas) based on prior work implicating their involvement in the pathophysiology of stress, trauma exposure, and addiction. We examined connectivity for each side of the amygdala separately, as the human literature has documented differences in anatomical connections for the left and right amygdala. The resulting correlation map from each participant was converted to Z map using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation in order to improve the normality of the correlation coefficients. The Z maps were then analyzed in a random-effects model in SPM8 to reveal any differences in RSFC between the Trauma and No-Trauma subgroups (see below for trauma-status determination). In all the group analysis, mean FD was entered as a nuisance variable to control for participants’ head motion.
Based on prior work, we further constrained the voxels that we queried in relation to the amygdala, based on a mask that includes mesolimbic regions (amygdala, ventral tegmental area/midbrain, ventral striatum, caudal orbitofrontal cortex), and three other addiction-relevant regions including the insula, dorsal striatum, and thalamus. The mask including our a priori ROIs, was created using Harvard-Oxford Cortical Structural Atlas (FMRI of the Brain [FMRIB] Software Library, Oxford Centre for FMIRB) with a probability threshold ranging between 10–25%. For the purposes of the current paper, this limbic mask is treated as the unit of analysis (a single region of interest). Individual sub-group maps were thresholded at FWE corrected, p<0.05, and the group contrast maps are cluster corrected at p<0.05 with 425 contiguous voxels based on the recently debugged version of 3dClustSim using autocorrelation function (ACF) option in AFNI_17.2.05. ACF was calculated by running 3dFWHMx on the residual image at group level.
2.5 Trauma Versus No-Trauma Subgroups
Of the 34 participants, 18 were designated to the “Trauma” group while 16 were designated as the “No-Trauma” group. Determination of trauma status was based on participants’ response to two measures. The first was the ASI supplement – PTSD questionnaire, which probes whether one has ‘ever experienced something so frightening, horrible, or upsetting that others rarely go through’. Prior studies have used the ASI to measure trauma exposure. Trauma status was further queried by participants’ responses to the clinician administered MINI, which assesses for trauma exposure as a preliminary criterion for PTSD diagnosis. All participants in the Trauma group endorsed trauma exposure on both the MINI and ASI. It is worth noting that, while the parent study excluded Axis-I diagnosis including PTSD, Trauma participants in this study endorsed trauma exposure but did not meet criteria for PTSD.
3. Results
3.1. Group Comparisons: Behavioral Assessments
3.1.1 Corroboration of Trauma Status
Importantly, individuals’ PTSD symptom severity, assessed with PCL-C scores, was also examined for a potential corroboration of the trauma split. The Trauma group endorsed prior trauma and had elevated scores on the PCL-C (M = 42.50, SD = 16.11), relative to the No-Trauma group (M = 25.06, SD = 10.13; (t(32) = −3.72, p = .001), as would be expected (see Table 1). Scores on the PCL-C range from 17–85 with higher scores reflecting increased PTSD symptom severity.
3.1.2 Demographic Comparisons
Trauma and No-Trauma groups did not differ on any demographic measures, clinician administered measures, self-report measures, or substance use severity measures, with exception for diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder (MDD). Significant group differences were observed for diagnosis of MDD, Current (χ(1) = 6.476, p = .011) and Recurrent (χ(1) = 4.030, p = .045) with the trauma group evidencing greater prevalence of MDD diagnoses.
3.2. Group Comparisons: Resting-State Functional Connectivity (RSFC)
Our analyses focused on an intralimbic mask in order to limit our observations to interconnected nodes within our a priori limbic-striatal hypotheses. While both the No-Trauma and Trauma groups exhibited positive connectivity between amygdala and interconnected nodes within our limbic-striatal mask (See Fig 2, top panel), formal statistical comparison revealed significant differences in connectivity between the groups (See Fig 1, bottom panel). As shown, the Trauma group evidenced significantly greater positive connectivity between the amygdala and limbic-striatal regions (threshold as detailed above in Methods). For the left amygdala, peaks within the limbic-striatal mask (See Fig 1, bottom panel and Table 2) included amygdala, putamen, caudate, pallidum, insula, hippocampus, and brain stem (not shown). For the right amygdala, peaks within the limbic-striatal mask included these same regions (See Fig 1, bottom panel and Table 2) with exception for the brain stem and the addition of thalamus and parahippocampus. There was an absence of inverse connectivity patterns between the amygdala and any regions included in the limbic-striatal mask.
4. Discussion
4.1. Summary of Findings
RSFC maps of the Trauma and No-Trauma groups evidenced similar overall patterns of amygdala connectivity with limbic-striatal regions. However, our findings indicate that CUD patients with trauma, relative to no trauma, evidenced enhanced amygdala RSFC with limbic-striatal regions. To our knowledge, this study is the first to examine RSFC among those with CUD and trauma history. Data presented here may help to identify a vulnerability phenotype, as trauma-exposed SUD patients have a heightened communication among interconnected motivational nodes that is observable, even at rest. This heightened state of intra-limbic connectivity might predispose one to being more easily triggered by drug-related cues, thus leading to relapse.
The current results, finding differences within CUD patients (i.e., between Trauma and No-Trauma subgroups) complement the literature examining amygdala RSFC and SUDs. For example, amygdala RSFC has shown the ability to distinguish heroin dependent patients and CUD patients from healthy controls. Further, amygdala RSFC has shown, within CUD patients, the ability to distinguish CUD patients with recent cocaine use (i.e., past 3–4 days verified with urine drug screen) compared to those without recent use, and to distinguish those who relapse from those who do not within the first 30 days following treatment. These several results demonstrate the potential sensitivity of RSFC both for detecting differences between patients and healthy controls, and for distinguishing clinically important subgroups. Our results reveal further within-group heterogeneity: amygdala-intralimbic RSFC can distinguish CUD patients with prior trauma from those without a trauma history.
4.2. Interpretation of Findings
Increased connectivity between the amygdala and limbic-striatal structures in the resting state likely reflects an underlying dysfunction that may also manifest during tasks that make demands on these same circuits. Indeed, recent data from our lab, suggests that CUD individuals with prior adversity (e.g., prior sexual, emotional, and physical abuse) have an enhanced response to evocative cues (i.e., cocaine, sexual, and aversive) in mesolimbic motivational brain circuitry. Parallel results have been documented in aversively-motivated disorders (i.e., PTSD, generalized anxiety), in which there is enhanced amygdala reactivity to evocative cues. The impact of prior adversity (trauma or abuse) on both resting connectivity and task-related measures underscores the potential relevance of these brain measures as biomarkers of clinical vulnerability.
As with any human studies examining the impact of trauma history, the current findings are correlational. However, whether the current results reflect predisposing factors, the impact of prior trauma, or very likely, an interaction, they have both theoretical and practical value, underscoring the importance of within group heterogeneity on the neural substrates associated with addiction.
4.3. Limitations and Future Directions
One strength of this study is the demonstration of differences in amygdala-based RSFC observed in the absence of clinically-significant comorbid psychiatric diagnosis, as our population was intentionally truncated on psychiatric severity. These observations, in a truncated sample, are robust and suggest, if anything, a continuum wherein studies including a full range of psychiatric severity (e.g., co-occurring PTSD, depression) could be stronger. As with any set of new findings, certain limitations were present that may help to guide future research. First, this study focused exclusively on male cocaine patients. Future studies may wish to include female participants and other SUDs to determine the generalizability of our results. Second, our seed-based analysis considered the amygdala as a singular unit. Future studies will benefit by examining the independent functions of connectivity within amygdala subdivisions (laterobasal, centromedial, and superficial) that may play unique roles in addiction. Future studies with a larger sample size would increase sensitivity for detection of differences, enabling examinations of amygdala sub-regions.
For this initial study of RSFC in cocaine patients with and without trauma, we used a single ROI (limbic-striatal mask) and a cluster corrected threshold of p<0.05 in the group comparison. Our hypotheses and discussions are thus intentionally limited to circuit-level, rather than the several interconnected nodes within the mask. This initial study lays the foundation for future studies with sample sizes that will enable statistical examination of connectivity with multiple individual brain regions.
4.4. Concluding Remarks
Our results suggest that amygdala-connected neural circuits, assessed with RSFC, may offer a sensitive biomarker of prior trauma for those with CUD. To our knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate enhanced intralimbic connectivity among those with trauma history, within a sample of CUD patients. This finding has potential clinical relevance as trauma-exposed SUD individuals’ have greater relapse rates, underscoring the need for treatments to address the special needs of this population. Our ongoing studies will test whether this biomarker of enhanced RSFC intralimbic connectivity can predict clinical outcomes, including drug craving and relapse. Indeed, our findings may serve to identify who is at greater risk for stress-related relapse – encouraging development of therapeutic interventions (behavioral or pharmacological) that address these critical brain vulnerabilities.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
           Contributors         
All authors contributed to the design of the study, and interpretation of the data. MG, ARC, and KJ led the data analysis for the manuscript and MG and ARC wrote the first draft. All authors contributed to writing and editing subsequent drafts of the manuscript.
           Conflicts of Interest         
No conflicts declared
Stress signaling pathways that impair prefrontal cortex structure and function
Striatal dopamine D2 receptor availability predicts the thalamic and medial prefrontal responses to reward in cocaine abusers three years later
Cocaine dependence with and without posttraumatic stress disorder: A comparison of substance use, trauma history and psychiatric comorbidity

Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI
The reinstatement model of drug relapse: Recent neurobiological findings, emerging research topics, and translational research
Substance abuse and posttraumatic stress disorder
Altered resting-state functional connectivity of basolateral and centromedial amygdala complexes in 16 posttraumatic stress disorder
Sexual abuse and the outcome of addiction treatment
The neural basis of drug stimulus processing and craving: An activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis
Limbic activation during cue-induced cocaine craving
Increased corticolimbic connectivity in cocaine dependence versus pathological gambling is associated with drug severity and emotion-related impulsivity
Motivational salience amygdala tuning from traits, needs, values, and goals
Tail-pinch stress increases extracellular DOPAC levels (as measured by in vivo voltammetry) in the rat nucleus accumbens but not frontal cortex: Antagonism by diazepam and zolpidem
Neural systems involved in fear and anxiety measured with fear-potentiated startle
Trauma and PTSD in patients with alcohol, drug, or dual dependence: A multi-center study
From the ventral to the dorsal striatum: Devolving views of their roles in drug addiction
Trauma history and relapse probability among patients seeking substance abuse treatment
Limbic activation to cigarette smoking cues independent of nicotine withdrawal: A perfusion fMRI study
Clinical applications of resting state functional connectivity
Substance use after residential treatment among individuals with co-occurring disorders: The role of anxiety/depressive symptoms and trauma exposure
The impact of stress on addiction
Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting-state functional connectivity
Searching for a baseline: Functional imaging and the resting human brain
Dynamic adaptation of large-scale brain networks in response to acute stressors
Imaging brain response to reward in addictive disorders
Substance use disorders in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder: A review of the literature
The neural basis of addiction: A pathology of motivation and choice
Effects of chronic and acute stimulants on brain functional connectivity hubs
Neurocircuitry of addiction
Common biology of craving across legal and illegal drugs–A quantitative meta-analysis of cue-reactivity brain response
Acute effect of methadone maintenance dose on brain FMRI response to heroin-related cues
A review of neuroimaging studies in PTSD: Heterogeneity of response to symptom provocation
Examination of the utility of the Beck Anxiety Inventory and its factors as a screener for anxiety disorders
Functional connectivity in single and multislice echoplanar imaging using resting-state fluctuations
Addiction related alteration in resting-state brain connectivity
Effect of cocaine dependence on brain connections: Clinical implications
Precentral gyrus discrepancy in electronic versions of the Talairach atlas
An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets
Antidepressant medications reduce subcortical–cortical resting-state functional connectivity in healthy volunteers
Cortico-amygdala coupling as a marker of early relapse risk in cocaine-addicted individuals
The fifth edition of the Addiction Severity Index
The modified Hamilton rating scale for depression: Reliability and validity
The Addiction Severity Index as a screen for trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder
The insula and drug addiction: An interoceptive view of pleasure, urges, and decision-making
Do trauma history and PTSD symptoms influence addiction relapse context?
Course and treatment of patients with both substance use and posttraumatic stress disorders
Physical and sexual abuse among women and men with substance use disorders
Health and well being of substance use disorder patients with and without posttraumatic stress disorder
Anxiety, cognition, and habit: a multiple memory systems perspective
Emotional arousal and multiple memory systems in the mammalian brain
Neurocircuitry models of posttraumatic stress disorder and beyond: A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies
Prevalence of physical and sexual abuse among substance abuse patients and impact on treatment outcomes
Reciprocal connections between the amygdala and the hippocampal formation, perirhinal cortex, and postrhinal cortex in rat: A review
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion

Emotional, physical and sexual abuse are associated with a heightened limbic response to cocaine cues
The neural basis of drug craving: An incentive- sensitization theory of addiction
Review. The incentive sensitization theory of addiction: Some current issues
Physical and sexual abuse history and addiction treatment outcomes
Higher and longer stress-induced increase in dopamine concentrations in the nucleus accumbens of animals predisposed to amphetamine self-administration
Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI
The amygdalostriatal projections in the monkey. An anterograde tracing study
The impact of early trauma and abuse on residential substance abuse treatment outcomes for women
Impact of in-scanner head motion on multiple measures of functional connectivity: Relevance for studies of neurodevelopment in youth
Stress prompts habit behavior in humans
Pharmacologically-induced stress: A cross-species probe for translational research in drug addiction and relapse
Attention and regional cerebral blood flow in posttraumatic stress disorder patients with substance abuse histories
Higher brain blood flow at amygdala and lower frontal cortex blood flow in PTSD patients with comorbid cocaine and alcohol abuse compared with normals
The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI): The development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10
The neurocircuitry of fear, stress, and anxiety disorders
Timeline follow-back
Effects of cocaine and footshock stress on extracellular dopamine levels in the ventral striatum
Altered resting-state amygdala functional connectivity in men with posttraumatic stress disorder
Resting state functional connectivity in addiction: Lessons learned and a road ahead
Chronic stress, drug use and vulnerability to addiction
Suicide risk in civilian PTSD patients – Predictors of suicidal ideation, planning and attempts
Health problems of substance- dependent veterans with and those without trauma history
Cocaine-related attentional bias following trauma cue exposure among cocaine dependent in-patients with and without post-traumatic stress disorder
The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI
Enhanced resting-state connectivity of amygdala in the immediate aftermath of acute psychological stress
The neuroscience of addiction
Dopamine increases in striatum do not elicit craving in cocaine abusers unless they are coupled with cocaine cues
Addiction: Decreased reward sensitivity and increased expectation sensitivity conspire to overwhelm the brain's control circuit
Addiction: Beyond dopamine reward circuitry
The PTSD Checklist (PCL): Reliability, validity, and diagnostic utility
Neural responses to subliminally presented cannabis and other emotionally evocative cues in cannabis-dependent individuals
Default mode network activity and connectivity in psychopathology
Childhood trauma and health outcomes in adults with comorbid substance abuse and mental health disorders
Incentive sensitization by previous amphetamine exposure: Increased cue-triggered “wanting” for sucrose reward
A comprehensive assessment of regional variation in the impact of head micromovements on functional connectomics
Addressing head motion dependencies for small-world topologies in functional connectomics
Nipping cue reactivity in the bud: Baclofen prevents limbic activation elicited by subliminal drug cues
A survey of PTSD screening and referral practices in VA addiction treatment programs
Seed based connectivity between the left and right amygdala and the a priori limbicstriatal mask for the Trauma and No-Trauma groups.
Top panel depicts left and right amygdala connectivity for Trauma and No-Trauma groups (FWE corrected at p<0.05 with k=20 for each group).
Bottom panel depicts the Trauma > No-Trauma contrast (cluster corrected at p>0.05 with k=347). Peaks within the statistically significant limbic-striatal mask included the amygdala, putamen, pallidum, caudate, thalamus, insula, hippocampus/parahippocampus, and brain stem (not shown). Images displayed in neurologic convention (left = left) with corresponding MNI coordinates.
Demographics and Clinical Measures
	Entire Sample	Trauma	No-Trauma	Differences	 	Characteristics	Value	Value	Value		 		 	Age (year), n	34	18	16	ns.	 		 	   Mean (SD)	47.20 (6.70)	47.38	47.00		 	   Range	34–60	34–60	34–59		 		 	Years of Education, n	34	18	16	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	12.87 (1.86)	12.78 (2.13)	12.96 (1.57)		 	   Range	8.0–16.0	8.0–16.0	10–16		 		 	Race/ethnicity, n (%)	34	18	16	ns.	 	   White non-Hispanic	2 (5.9%)	0 (0%)	2 (12.5%		 	   African American	32 (94.1%)	18 (100%)	14 (87.5%)		 		 	Psychiatric Diagnosis, n (%)	34	18	16		 	   MDD, Current	6 (17.6%)	6 (33.3%)	0 (0%)	*	 	   MDD, Recurrent	4 (11.8%)	4 (22.2%)	0 (0%)	*	 	   MDD, Recurrent Remitted	2 (5.9%)	1 (5.6%)	1 (6.3%)	ns.	 	   Cannabis Dependence	4 (11.8%)	2 (11.1%)	2 (12.5%)	ns.	 		 	Years of Lifetime Use, n	34	18	16	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	19.36 (9.76)	21.72 (9.58)	16.72 (9.56)		 	   Range	2.0–38.0	5.0–38.0	2.0–30.0		 		 	Days Used (in past 30), n	34	18	16	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	18.80 (7.92)	20.91 (5.63)	16.44 (9.52)		 	   Range	1.5–30	10.0–30.0	1.5–29.0		 		 	Days Since Last Use, n	31	16	15	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	4.03 (3.96)	2.88 (1.85)	5.27 (5.17)		 	   Range	1–22	1–6	1–22		 		 	Total PCL-C Score, n	34	18	16	**	 	   Mean (SD)	34.29 (16.07)	42.50 (16.11)	25.06(10.13)		 	   Range	17–69	17–69	17–48		 		 	Total HAM-D Score, n	34	18	16	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	6.62 (5.87)	8.06 (5.83)	5.00 (5.62)		 	   Range	0–20	0–20	0–15		 		 	Total BDI Score, n	32	16	16	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	9.72 (9.09)	10.81 (10.55)	8.63 (7.56)		 	   Range	0–31	0–31	0–23		 		 	Total BAI Score, n	32	16	16	ns.	 	   Mean (SD)	4.78 (5.72)	6.63 (6.70)	2.94 (3.95)		 	   Range	0–27	0–27	0–11		 	
Note. All group differences were assessed using independent samples T-Tests and Chi-Square. MDD=Major Depressive Disorder; PCL-C=PTSD symptom checklist; HAM-A=Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression; BDI=Beck Depression Inventory; BAI=Beck Anxiety Inventory No group differences were observed for all group comparisons with exception for PCL-C scores, which were expected to differ between groups.
ns. = none significant differences.
p < 0.05.
p < 0.01.
Seed Region	Cluster (C)	Brain nodes withina priori mask	Hemisphere	Peak T	P value	Coordinates	 	x	y	z	 	Left Amygdala									 		C1 (875 voxels)	Amygdala	Left	5.89	0	−18	−6	−16	 			Putamen	Left	3.38	0.001	−26	4	6	 			Pallidum	Left	2.86	0.004	−22	−8	−4	 			Brain stem	Left	2.51	0.009	−6	−20	−20	 			Caudate	Left	2.39	0.012	−10	18	−2	 			Hippocampus	Left	2.18	0.018	−28	−22	−14	 		C2 (558 voxels)	Putamen	Right	4.33	0	18	16	−4	 			Caudate	Right	2.75	0.005	16	12	6	 			Insula	Right	2.65	0.006	38	−10	4	 	Right Amygdala									 		C3 (632 voxels)	Thalamus	Left	3.68	0	−8	−22	6	 			Pallidum	Left	3.44	0.001	−20	−10	−4	 			Caudate	Left	3.13	0.002	−20	16	12	 			Putamen	Left	2.66	0.006	−26	4	2	 			Amygdala	Left	2.64	0.006	−18	−6	−16	 		C4 (421 voxels)	Parahippocampus	Right	2.91	0.003	32	−4	−30	 			Putamen	Right	2.63	0.007	22	6	−8	 			Caudate	Right	2.50	0.009	20	20	4	 			Amygdala	Right	2.34	0.013	22	−6	−16	 	
Note. Trauma and No-Trauma cocaine patient sub-groups differed in amygdala connectivity within an a priori limbic-striatal mask (cluster threshold p<0.05). Shown above are peaks within the significant clusters with right and left amygdala as seed regions.
C = Cluster
Highlights
Trauma history was examined in relation to brain function among cocaine users.
Cocaine users with prior trauma evidenced stronger intralimbic connectivity.
Trauma history influences brain function underlying cocaine use disorder.
