Machine learning identifies unaffected first-degree relatives with functional network patterns and cognitive impairment similar to those of schizophrenia patients
Schizophrenia (SCZ) patients and their unaffected first-degree relatives (FDRs) share similar functional neuroanatomy. However, it remains largely unknown to what extent unaffected FDRs with functional neuroanatomy patterns similar to patients can be identified at an individual level. In this study, we used a multivariate pattern classification method to learn informative large-scale functional networks (FNs) and build classifiers to distinguish 32 patients from 30 healthy controls and to classify 34 FDRs as with or without FNs similar to patients. Four informative FNs were identified based on a training cohort – the cerebellum, default mode network (DMN), ventral fronto-temporal network, and posterior DMN with parahippocampal gyrus – and pattern classifiers built upon these FNs achieved a correct classification rate of 83.9% (sensitivity 87.5%, specificity 80.0%, and area under the ROC [AUC] 0.914) estimated based on leave-one-out cross-validation for the training cohort and a correct classification rate of 77.5% (sensitivity 72.5% , specificity 82.5%, and AUC 0.811) for an independent validation cohort. The classification scores of the FDRs and patients were negatively correlated with their measures of cognitive function. FDRs identified by the classifiers as having SCZ patterns were similar to the patients, but significantly different from the controls and FDRs with normal patterns in terms of their cognitive measures. These results demonstrate that the pattern classifiers built upon the informative FNs can serve as biomarkers for quantifying brain alterations in schizophrenia and help to identify FDRs with FN patterns and cognitive impairment similar to those of SCZ patients.
Introduction
Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder with a lifetime prevalence of 1% and an estimated heritability of 64–80%. Although unaffected first-degree relatives (FDRs) of schizophrenia (SCZ) patients have a 10-fold increased risk of developing SCZ, only 11–15% of the children of patients may develop adult-onset SCZ. The variable clinical outcomes of individuals with a genetically high risk may result from latent heterogeneity. Since early intervention could help prevent and delay the onset of psychosis, it is desirable to develop biomarkers capable of the early identification individuals at higher risks of developing SCZ.
Evidence from neuroimaging studies suggests that neuroanatomical deficits in the relatives of SCZ patients may increase their susceptibility to future psychosis. Particularly, grey matter changes in the inferior temporal gyrus may improve the prediction of a high risk of SCZ; and baseline abnormalities of the anterior cingulate cortex in individuals at ultra-high risk of psychosis predict the time to onset of psychosis. Recent studies of large-scale intrinsic functional networks (FNs) have also demonstrated that individuals at high risk for psychosis and SCZ patients share disease-specific patterns. However, unaffected FDRs are typically considered to be a homogenous group or are categorized by demographic and clinical characteristics, which may have limited sensitivity to capture subtle differences between FDRs and healthy controls. 
Pattern classification studies have demonstrated that brain structural patterns help to identify individuals in at-risk mental states of psychosis and to predict disease transition at an individual level. Studies have demonstrated that large-scale FNs, in conjunction with pattern classification techniques, can distinguish SCZ patients from controls at the individual level.
Following these successful pattern-classification studies, in the present study we adopted a pattern-classification method to identify FDRs at higher risk of developing SCZ based on their FNs derived from resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI). In particular, rsfMRI data were collected from SCZ patients, FDRs, and healthy controls (HCs), independent component analysis (ICA) was adopted to estimate their FNs based on the rsfMRI data, a pattern-classification technique was used to identify informative FNs and build support vector machine (SVM) classifiers to distinguish SCZs from healthy controls, and finally the SVM classifiers were used to determine if FDRs are similar to the SCZ patients. We hypothesized that (1) FDRs have heterogeneous FNs that can be characterized as SCZ-specific or control-specific using pattern classifiers to distinguish patients from controls; and (2) FDRs with SCZ-specific FNs and patients have similar cognitive impairment, particularly processing speed inefficiency, a common symptom of SCZ.
Methods and Materials
Participants
The study included 60 SCZ patients, 43 unaffected FDRs of patients (18 siblings, 15 sons/daughters, and 10 parents), and 50 healthy controls. Of the 43 unaffected FDRs, 10 were relatives of the patients recruited in this study. An independent dataset of 40 patients and 40 controls was used as a validation cohort to evaluate the performance of classifiers developed in our study (see Supplementary material for details). All participants provided written informed consent and the protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Beijing Hui-Long-Guan Hospital, Beijing, China.
Participants were interviewed with the Structured Clinical Interview of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition, text revision (DSM-IV-TR) axis I disorders (SCID-I, Chinese version). Based on interviews and reviews of clinical history, patients who met the DSM-IV-TR criteria for SCZ were included. FDRs were excluded for Axis I psychopathology and all FDRs included in this study did not have personal history of Axis I disorders according to SCID-I. The controls did not have family history of SCZ, personal psychiatric, or neurological disorder. The following exclusion criteria were applied to all groups: (a) <18 or >45 years of age; (b) left-handedness; (c) history of brain trauma with loss of consciousness, neurological diseases, or serious physical diseases (such as respiratory disorders and cardiovascular disease); (d) diagnosis of alcohol/substance abuse within 12 months before participation; and (e) contraindications for MRI scan. SCZ patients were also evaluated with the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale for symptom severity. In addition, cognitive function was assessed using the digit-span and digit-symbol coding tests of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale in all participants. More information on the medication histories of the patients can be found in the supplemental material.
Data acquisition and preprocessing
MR images were collected using a Siemens Magnetom Trio 3.0 Tesla imaging system with a standard head coil at Peking University Third Hospital. For image registration, high-resolution structural T1 MRI data were acquired (256×256×192 matrix; slice thickness 1 mm; voxel resolution 1×1×1 mm3; flip angle 7°; repetition time [TR] 2530 ms; echo time [TE] 3.44 ms; inversion time 1100 ms). RsfMRI scans were obtained using a gradient-recalled echo-planar imaging sequence (field of view 220 mm, 64×64×64 matrix; TR 2000 ms; TE 30 ms; flip angle 90°; slice thickness 4 mm; voxel resolution 3.4×3.4×4.0 mm³). Each rsfMRI scan had 240 volumes of 33 axial slices. During acquisition, participants were instructed to close their eyes, relax, and remain awake. All images were visually checked for artefacts, structural abnormalities, and pathologies by neuroradiologists.
Frame-wise displacement (FD) was calculated to measure volume-to-volume changes in head position. Thirty-seven participants were excluded because of large head-movements (mean FD > 0.5 mm). The final sample comprised 40 controls, 34 FDRs, and 42 SCZ patients. The preprocessing steps are outlined in the supplemental material.
Identification of informative functional networks in schizophrenia
Independent component analysis guided by group information (GIG-ICA) was adopted to extract subject-specific FNs from the rsfMRI data of patients, unaffected FDRs, and controls.
The number of independent components (ICs) was estimated automatically to be 15, based on 10 randomly selected controls and 10 randomly selected SCZ patients for computing group-level ICs using FSL Melodic with its default setting of Laplace approximation to the evidence of the model order. The resulting group-level ICs were then used as guidance information to compute the ICs of the remaining participants using GIG-ICA, finally each subject was characterized with 15 FNs (supplemental Figure S1). Particularly, we used a gray matter mask in ICA in order to minimize the partial volume effects of cerebrospinal fluid and spurious effects on connectivity measures, as well as to increase the sensitivity to BOLD signal changes.
A pattern classification method was used to identify informative FNs and build SVM classifiers to distinguish 32 patients from 30 controls who were not included in the computation of group-level ICs. Particularly, we built classifiers on a subset of FNs that were selected to optimize the classification performance for distinguishing SCZs from HCs using an SVM classification algorithm. The SVM classification was based on similarity measures between subjects computed based on their FNs. A forward component selection technique was adopted to identify the most discriminative set of FNs using following procedure. Classifiers were first built on individual FNs, one for each FN, then the classifiers were evaluated with a leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation, and finally the FN with the best classification performance was selected to be included in the classification. By combining the first selected FN and one of the other FNs, a classifier could be built upon two FNs. All classifiers built on two FNs were then evaluated using the same LOO cross‐validation, and the FNs with the best classification performance were selected to be included in the classification. This procedure was repeated to include more FNs in the classification one by one until one single classifier was built upon all available FNs. Finally, the combination of FNs with the overall best classification performance was identified to be included in the final classification. The FN selection and the classifier construction were carried out based on the training data. In the LOO cross-validation setting, each participant was analyzed as testing data once to evaluate a sigmoid kernel SVM classifier that was built upon the data of all other subjects. To avoid bias of the classification, we applied a nested LOO procedure to optimize the parameters of the SVM classifier by tuning them and choosing an optimal combination of FNs with a forward component selection algorithm (details in supplemental material).
FNs with high frequency (frequency >0.8) were defined as informative FNs. Based on the informative FNs of 62 subjects, the LOO cross-validation model yielded 62 SVM classifiers. Each of the SVM classifiers generated a classification score which was a median value of classification scores of its nested LOO classifiers, with a positive value to indicate SCZ or a negative value to indicate normal. In addition to classification accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) and the area under the ROC (AUC) were also calculated to evaluate the classification performance. Nonparametric permutation tests were used to estimate the statistical significance of the classification performance. The null distribution of the classification rate was estimated for all subject-specific SVM models using 10-fold cross-validation by performing 10000 random permutation tests with subject class labels randomly permuted. Finally, the null distribution of the classification error was visualized as a histogram of classification rates.
The informative FNs were further validated in terms of their classification performance using an independent dataset (see supplemental material for details).
The LOO cross-validation classifiers were applied to the FNs of FDRs, so each FDR was given 62 individual classification scores. The median of the individual classification scores was finally used as a robust measure to characterize the affinity of each FDR to SCZ (a positive score indicates a SCZ pattern). A flowchart of the pattern classification algorithm is shown in supplemental Figure S3. Based on the classification scores, the FDRs were classified as SCZ-specific (S-FDRs) or HC-specific (H-FDRs).
We also adopted a certainty measure to evaluate the classification reliability for each individual subject based on the LOO cross-validation classifiers. Particularly, the classification certainty was measured by , where np is the number of positive classification scores and n is the total number of LOO classifiers. A higher value indicated a higher classification reliability, and vice versa. We excluded subjects with lower classification certainty (<0.9) in post-hoc analyses. Finally, the sample comprised 27 controls, 33 FDRs, and 28 SCZs in the post-hoc analysis.
Voxelwise functional connectivity (FC) measures of each informative FN were computed as Pearson correlation coefficients between time courses of the whole-brain voxels and the FN, and transferred to z-scores for every participant. Then, the voxelwise FC measures were compared between any two groups using statistical nonparametric mapping software (SnPM13, http://warwick.ac.uk/snpm; p = 0.05, permutation tests n = 10000, age, sex, years of education, and FD as covariates). The comparisons were restricted to brain regions with significant FC within the FN (one sample t-test, p = 0.05, family-wise error correction, and cluster size >100).
Similarity measures of informative FNs between individuals were computed based on principal angles for visualizing the similarity among FDRs, SCZs, and HCs.
Statistical comparisons of clinical characteristics between groups
To identify functional patterns for clinical characteristics analysis, FDRs were divided into two subgroups: those with SCZ-specific classification scores >0, and those with HC-specific classification scores ≤0 (positive scores reflect the presence of an SZC-specific functional pattern, and negative scores indicate a control-specific pattern). The pseudo two-sample t-test at 5% significance level (permutation tests, n = 10000) was used to quantify the statistical significance of group differences.
Correlation analysis between cognitive function and classification scores
A general linear model with outliers removed at 95% confidence intervals was used to investigate correlations between the classification scores and measures of cognitive function in groups, with age, sex, years of education, and FD as covariates.
Results
Demographic and clinical characteristics
Demographic and clinical information is presented in Table 1. The groups did not differ in sex or educational level, except that the FDRs were older than the HCs (F2,113 = 6.865, p = 0.002).
Significant differences were found across groups in the scores for digit-span (F2,113 =14.251, p<0.001) and digit-symbol coding (F2,113=35.924, p<0.001). The SCZs and FDRs performed significantly worse than the HCs on all cognitive tests. In addition, the FDRs had higher scores on the digit-symbol coding tests than the SCZs.
Aberrant FNs in SCZs identified by pattern classification
The informative FNs (Figure 1B, frequency >0.8) included the default mode network (DMN), cerebellum (CB), ventral fronto-temporal network (vFTN), and posterior DMN with parahippocampal gyrus (Figure 1A). The accuracy of the classifiers built upon the informative FNs was 83.9% (sensitivity 87.5%, specificity 80%) with an AUC of 0.914. Nonparametric permutation tests showed that the classification results were statistically significant (p <0.0001, n = 10000), as indicated by the histogram of permuted classification rates shown in Figure 1D. The classification results on an independent testing dataset showed that the identified informative FNs achieved good performance with a correct classification rate of 77.5% (sensitivity 72.5%, specificity 82.5%) and an AUC of 0.811 (see supplemental material for details).
Affinity FDRs to SCZs
Significant differences were found between SCZs and FDRs, FDRs and HCs, and SCZs and HCs (Figure 2A). We applied the classifier that optimally separated SCZs and HCs to the rsfMRI data of FDRs. Based on the classification scores, FDRs were divided into two subgroups: 15 SCZ-specific (classification scores>0) and 18 HC-specific (classification scores≤0). There were significant differences between the HCs and S-FDRs, and SCZs and H-FDRs (Table 2).
Pseudo t-tests were conducted to compare the FC of informative FNs among these groups. Compared with healthy controls, both SCZs and S-FDRs had weaker connectivity in the CB and vFTN (middle temporal gyrus), and stronger connectivity in the pDMN (precuneus). Also, the S-FDRs showed lower connectivity of these FNs than SCZs (Figure 2C). The HCs and H-FDRs exhibited higher FC in the CB and vFTN (middle temporal gyrus), and H-FDRs exhibited higher FC in pDMN (precuneus and angular gyrus) than the SCZs, while the H-FDRs exhibited weaker FC in CB, stronger FC in DMN (anterior cingulate cortex, ACC), vFTN (inferior frontal gyrus), and pDMN (precuneus) than the HCs. The results showed that abnormalities in the connectivity of the 4 identified FNs largely overlapped in SCZs and S-FDRs. Furthermore, HCs and H-FDRs were similar, while SCZs and S-FDRs were relatively different from other groups (Figure 2B). Post-hoc analysis results based on all subjects, including 30 controls, 34 FDRs and 32 SCZs, are shown in supplemental Figure S4.
Cognitive deficits in relatives and correlation analysis
A significant difference was found between the S-FDRs and H-FDRs in the digit-symbol coding test (Table 2). Moreover, the S-FDRs showed worse performance than the HCs in the digit-span test and digit-symbol coding test, but no significant difference was found between S-FDRs and SCZs. Meanwhile, the H-FDRs performed better than the SCZs in the digit-symbol and worse than the HCs in the digit-span tests. Similar results were obtained based on all subjects (supplemental Table S2).
The classification scores of FDRs were negatively correlated with their digit-symbol coding scores (Figure 3A), as were those of SCZs (Figure 3B). However, no significant correlation between these two scores was found in HCs. Similar correlation results were obtained based all the subjects (supplemental Figure S5).
Discussion
In the present study, we demonstrated that aberrant large-scale FNs identified by a multivariate pattern classification method were informative for quantifying brain changes not only in SCZs but also in FDRs. Specifically, FDRs were classified as showing SCZ-specific and HC-specific functional patterns. The S-FDRs were similar to the SCZs, but significantly different from the HCs and H-FDRs in terms of cognitive measures. The classification scores of the FDRs and SCZs were both correlated with their digit-symbol coding scores. These findings suggest that pattern recognition of large-scale FNs can help to identify unaffected FDRs with schizophrenia-specific FC patterns. Source codes of the classification algorithm are provided as supplementary data.
The multivariate pattern classification algorithm identified informative FNs that were able to differentiate SCZs from HCs with an accuracy of 83.9%. The ROC results and nonparametric permutation tests demonstrated that the classification algorithm performed well in distinguishing SCZs from HCs, and the validation based on an independent dataset demonstrated that the informative FNs identified were generalizable.
Instead of using frame censoring to reduce the head motion effect, which may result in loss of temporal degrees of freedom and result in different subjects having different numbers of time points, we excluded subjects with large head motion. Since FNs were computed using ICA that could help relieve head motion effect in rsfMRI data analysis and noisy FNs could be automatically excluded by the classification algorithm, excluding subjects with large head motion could effectively reduce head motion effect in our study.
The informative FNs included DMN, CB, vFTN, and pDMN with parahippocampal gyrus, largely consistent with previous findings. Particularly, FC and multimodal neuroimaging studies have revealed that schizophrenia variably involves several altered brain regions and circuits, and family members of schizophrenia patients might share similar changes. For example, abnormal FC within the DMN of patients and FDRs has been widely reported. The parahippocampal gyrus (the primary hub of the DMN to mediate the resting-state connectivity between the hippocampus and PCC) exhibits abnormalities in patients and individuals at high risk of schizophrenia. Connections between the cerebellum and other regions are correlated with soft neurological signs in adolescents at high risk for psychosis. The vFTN, consisting the of ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and temporal gyrus, plays an important role in the network for language, which is dysfunctional in both SCZs and high-risk subjects.
Here, we revealed that FDRs had heterogeneous classification scores. Particularly, 15 out of 33 FDRs had positive scores (SCZ patterns). S-FDRs and H-FDRs differed in their clinical characteristics without any differences in age, sex, and educational level. Significant differences in clinical characteristics, particularly measures of cognitive function, were found between the HCs and the S-FDRs, as well as between the SCZs and H-FDRs. The H-FDRs also differed from the HCs in terms of their digit-span scores. It is worth noting that no significant difference was found between SCZs and S-FDRs, indicating that the informative FNs used to identify the S-FDRs also capture SCZ-specific cognitive profiles.
Interestingly, the HCs and H-FDRs were similar in terms of the informative FNs, while the SCZs and the S-FDRs were less similar to the other groups, suggesting that the SCZs and S-FDRs were more heterogeneous in terms of the FNs than the HCs and H-FDRs. However, most previous studies of unaffected FDRs or high-risk relatives of schizophrenia patients typically considered them as a homogenous group or categorized them by demographic and clinical characteristics. This may lead to limited sensitivity to capture subtle differences between FDRs and healthy controls or patients.
The group comparison results of FC maps of the informative FNs demonstrated that the differences between HCs and S-FDRs and between H-FDRs and SCZs were similar to the differences between HCs and SCZs, i.e., weaker FC in SCZs and S-FDRs in the CB and vFTN. Within the DMN, patients and H-FDRs had abnormally high FC, and S-FDRs had higher FC in the posterior DMN but lower FC in the anterior DMN. This suggests that FDRs have uneven risks of developing the disease and S-FDRs may be at higher risk. Our study provides information complementary to previous structural MRI studies and the functional neuroanatomical patterns may have predictive value as biomarkers for capturing the predisposition to schizophrenia.
Cognitive impairment is widely recognized as a critical feature of schizophrenia, and is strongly associated with long-term functional outcome. Moreover, cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia typically precedes the onset of psychotic symptoms and has been reported in unaffected the first-degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia. Thus, cognitive dysfunction might reflect an early phenotype of brain changes associated with an elevated risk for schizophrenia. Several meta-analyses have identified processing speed inefficiency as the largest single cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. A similar dysfunction of processing speed has been reported in unaffected first-degree relatives and individuals at high-risk for psychosis. More specifically, symptomatic subjects are significantly more impaired than asymptomatic subjects in processing speed. Associations between neuropsychological performance and psychosis have also been identified. Our study has also revealed differences between the HCs and the S-FDRs in measures of cognitive function, as well as between SCZs and H-FDRs
Several risk factors (e.g., long duration of prodromal symptoms) have been identified as predictive of a transition from high-risk status to psychosis. In this study, the correlation analysis showed that the classification score may be a valuable predictor of functional brain changes. Previous studies have demonstrated that unaffected relatives have impairments, to a lesser degree that schizophrenic patients, in the same cognitive domains, and symptomatic subjects are significantly more impaired than asymptomatic subjects in digit-symbol coding. Digit-symbol coding is an index of information processing including processing speed, associative memory, and graphomotor-speed, and is the most sensitive index of genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia. It is a useful tool for quantifying cognitive impairment in schizophrenia patients and relatives at high risk of developing the illness. In this study, FDRs were categorized into two groups according to the classification scores. S-FDRs had more severe deficits contributing to functional impairment in digit symbol coding, and the classification scores of FDRs and SCZs had negatively correlations with their digit symbol coding scores, which indicated that S-FDRs might have higher risk for developing the disease. It also manifested that the classifiers built upon these FNs could serve as biomarkers for quantifying brain alternation in schizophrenia.
The present study has several limitations. First, we only have cross-sectional data of the FDRs and therefore we are not able to confirm if the S-FDRs will develop the disease in future. So far, we have followed 12 unaffected FDRs for 5 years, and they remain normal. Due to low incidence rate of schizophrenia in unaffected FDRs, longer follow-ups are needed to investigate if the S-FDRs had higher risk of development the disease than the H-FDRs. Second, the classification reliability might be affected by natural variability of the SCZs, HCs, and FDRs. The natural variability might lead to misclassification and a relatively small effect size in classification scores between the SCZs and the HCs. To gauge the classification reliability, we adopted a classification certainty measure for individual subjects. However, a large sample is needed to improve the classification reliability. Third, the family history of psychopathology was not assessed with a formal screening measure. Lastly, the participants’ cognitive function was characterized by a small number of measures. Other cognitive measures should be collected to facilitate a more comprehensive characterization of the brain function for further elucidating the differences between the H-FDRs and S-FDRs.
In conclusion, the present study suggests that aberrant large-scale FNs identified by a pattern classification method are informative for quantifying brain alternation in schizophrenia as well as in FDRs. The S-FDRs identified based on the informative FNs were similar to the SCZs in terms of cognitive measures. The classification scores of the FDRs and SCZs were correlated with their digit symbol coding scores. These findings suggest that pattern recognition of large-scale FNs could help identify unaffected FDRs with schizophrenia-specific FC patterns, and may help early recognize and treat individuals at high-risk of schizophrenia.
Supplementary Material
disclosures
The authors have declared that there is no conflict of interest.
References
Grey matter and cognitive deficits in young relatives of schizophrenia patients.
Cognitive deficits in youth with familial and clinical high risk to psychosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Neuropsychology, genetic liability, and psychotic symptoms in those at high risk of schizophrenia.
Cavum septum pellucidum in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: compared with first-degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia and healthy volunteers.
Impaired rich club connectivity in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients.
Verbal working memory impairment in schizophrenia patients and their first-degree relatives: evidence from the digit span task.
fMRI resting state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the human brain.
Overlooking the obvious: a meta-analytic comparison of digit symbol coding tasks and other cognitive measures in schizophrenia.
Genetically predisposed offspring with schizotypal features: an ultra high-risk group for schizophrenia?
Neural disruption to theory of mind predicts daily social functioning in individuals at familial high-risk for schizophrenia.
Group information guided ICA for fMRI data analysis.
Cognitive impairment in schizophrenia is the core of the disorder.
The New York High-Risk Project.
Disrupted working Memory Circuitry in Schizophrenia: Disentangling fMRI Markers of Core Pathology Versus other Aspects of Impaired Performance.
Unaffected Family Members and Schizophrenia Patients Share Brain Structure Patterns: A High-Dimensional Pattern Classification Study.

Discriminant analysis of functional connectivity patterns on Grassmann manifold.
COMPARE: classification of morphological patterns using adaptive regional elements.
A meta-analysis of cognitive deficits in adults with a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Anatomic abnormalities of the anterior cingulate cortex before psychosis onset: an MRI study of ultra-high-risk individuals.
Decreased resting-state interhemispheric functional connectivity in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients.
Prevalence of mental disorders in China: a cross-sectional epidemiological study.

Grey matter changes can improve the prediction of schizophrenia in subjects at high risk.
Is aberrant functional connectivity a psychosis endophenotype? A resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
Use of neuroanatomical pattern classification to identify subjects in at-risk mental states of psychosis and predict disease transition.
Electroconvulsive therapy-induced brain functional connectivity predicts therapeutic efficacy in patients with schizophrenia: a multivariate pattern recognition study.
Common genetic determinants of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in Swedish families: a population-based study.

An fMRI study of working memory in first-degree unaffected relatives of schizophrenia patients.
Neurological soft signs predict abnormal cerebellar-thalamic tract development and negative symptoms in adolescents at high risk for psychosis: a longitudinal perspective.
Effects of Fronto-Temporal Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation on Auditory Verbal Hallucinations and Resting-State Functional Connectivity of the Left Temporo-Parietal Junction in Patients With Schizophrenia.
An evaluation of the efficacy, reliability, and sensitivity of motion correction strategies for resting-state functional MRI.
GENDER DIFFERENCES IN THE EXPRESSION OF VERBAL MEMORY DEFICITS IN UNAFFECTED PARENTS OF PATIENTS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA.
Visual information processing dysfunction across the developmental course of early psychosis.
ICA-AROMA: A robust ICA-based strategy for removing motion artifacts from fMRI data.
Brain network connectivity in individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings.
Cognitive deficits in relatives of patients with schizophrenia: a meta-analysis.

Advances in schizophrenia.
Default-mode network dysfunction and self-referential processing in healthy siblings of schizophrenia patients.
The parahippocampal gyrus links the default-mode cortical network with the medial temporal lobe memory system.
Classifying and characterizing nicotine use disorder with high accuracy using machine learning and resting-state fMRI.
Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.
Neuropsychological performance over time in people at high risk of developing schizophrenia and controls.
An fMRI investigation of procedural learning in unaffected siblings of individuals with schizophrenia.
Risk factors for psychosis in an ultra high-risk group: psychopathology and clinical features.
(A) Spatial maps of four informative functional networks (FNs) that yielded the best discrimination performance for distinguishing schizophrenia patients from controls (Left is left). (B) The frequency of FNs that were selected in the cross-validation experiments. Networks selected with the highest frequencies (>0.8) are deemed as the most discriminative FNs. (C) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the most discriminative FNs (average area under the ROC curve [AUC]=0.914). (D) Histogram of the classification rates of permutation tests. Brain regions are shown as a voxelwise map of t statistics of one sample t-tests across all subjects with threshold p<0.015 (t value>20) and cluster size>100. The color bar indicates t values of one sample t-tests. CB = cerebellum; DMN = default mode network; vFTN = ventral fronto-temporal network; pDMN = posterior DMN.
(A) Histograms of the classification scores for the healthy controls (HCs), schizophrenia patients (SCZs) and the first-degree relatives of patients (FDRs) with SCZ-specific FDRs (S-FDRs) and HC-specific FDRs (H-FDRs) separately. (B) A matrix of similarity measures between any two participants based on the informative networks. (C) Voxelwise differences in functional connectivity among SCZs, HCs, FDRs with S-FDRs and H-FDRs separately. Brain regions shown in the networks display voxelwise pseudo t values of pseudo two sample t-test based on permutation tests (Left is left, p=0.05, permutation test n=10000, age, sex, years of education and head motion as covariates). For a comparison between X vs. Y, warm color: X >Y, cold color: X<Y. CB = cerebellum; DMN = default mode network; vFTN = ventral fronto-temporal network; pDMN = posterior DMN.
Association between the classification scores and clinical characteristics with age, sex, education level and head motion as covariates. Scatterplots show that classification scores were negatively correlated with digit symbol coding scores (A) in the first-degree relatives of patients (FDRs), and (B) in schizophrenia patients (SCZs).
Demographic and clinical features of the participants.
Characteristic	SCZ	FDR	HC	F (df) / χ2	p	SCZ vs. HC p / Cohen’s d	SCZ vs. FDR p / Cohen’s d	FDR vs. HC p / Cohen’s d	 	n = 42	n = 34	n = 40	 	Mean (±SD)	Mean (±SD)	Mean (±SD)	 	Age (years)	27.83(7.61)	31.65 (8.11)	25.52(5.50)	6.865 (2,113)	0.002	0.435 / 0.49	0.066 / 0.35	0.001 / 0.91	 	Sex (male/female)	15/27	13/21	19/21	1.285(2,113)	0.526	0.849 / -	1.000 / -	1.000 / -	 	Education level (years)	13.10(2.76)	12.58 (3.64)	14.30 (4.22)	2.294 (2,113)	0.106	0.389 / 0.34	1.000 / 0.17	0.128 / 0.44	 	Age at onset (years)	25.10(7.51)								 	Length of illness (years)	2.99 (2.18)								 	Frame-wise displacement	0.234 (0.099)	0.295 (0.109)	0.281 (0.102)	3.791 (2,113)	0.025	0.120 / 0.47	0.035 / 0.60	1.000 / 0.13	 	PANSS score									 	 Total	78.71 (6.29)								 	 Positive	26.02 (3.10)								 	 Negative	16.74 (3.52)								 	 General	35.95 (3.42)								 	Drug dose (mg/day, chlorpromazine-equivalent)	231.21 (97.25)								 	Digit span	13.64 (2.77)	13.73 (2.25)	16.35 (2.55)	14.251 (2,113)	0.000	0.000 / 1.03	1.000 / 0.04	0.000 / 1.10	 	Digit symbol coding	45.45 (14.77)	59.91 (13.60)	69.25 (9.50)	35.924 (2,113)	0.000	0.000 / 1.93	0.000 / 1.03	0.007 / 0.82	 	
SCZ = schizophrenia patients; FDR = first degree relatives of schizophrenia patients; HC = healthy controls; PANSS = Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale.
Pseudo t-test based on permutation test (n=10000) applied to the classification scores and clinical characteristics obtained from SCZ, FDR and HC.
Characteristic	Classification scores	Digit span	Digit symbol coding	 	SCZ (n=28)Mean (±SD)	0.661 (0.50)	13.71 (2.45)	46.07 (14.02)	 		 	FDR (n=33)Mean (±SD)	−0.041 (0.81)	13.75 (2.29)	60.06 (13.79)	 		 	  H-FDR  n = 18	−0.734 (0.13)	14.39 (2.5)	65.94 (8.53)	 		 	  S-FDR  n = 15	0.850 (0.11)	12.93 (1.73)	52.50 (15.78)	 		 	HC (n=27)Mean (±SD)	−0.568 (0.55)	16.52 (2.31)	70.07 (9.00)	 		 	SCZ vs. HCp /Cohen’s d	0.0001 / 2.36	0.0001 / 1.18	0.0001 / 2.03	 	SCZ vs. FDRp /Cohen’s d	0.00040 / 1.03	0.912 / 0.015	0.0003 / 1.01	 	FDR vs. HCp /Cohen’s d	0.0062 / 0.75	0.0001 / 1.20	0.0023 / 0.84	 	SCZ vs. S-FDRp /Cohen’s d	0.1682 / 0.46	0.276 / 0.35	0.180 / 0.44	 	HC vs. S-FDRp /Cohen’s d	0.0001 / 3.15	0.0001 / 1.68	0.0001 / 1.50	 	SCZ vs. H-FDRp /Cohen’s d	0.0001 / 3.51	0.364 / 0.27	0.0001 / 1.63	 	HC vs. H-FDRp /Cohen’s d	0.2413 / 0.38	0.0053 / 0.89	0.128 / 0.47	 	S-FDR vs. H-FDRp /Cohen’s d	0.0001 / 12.83	0.0592 / 0.66	0.00380 / 1.10	 	
SCZ = schizophrenia patients; FDR = first degree relatives of schizophrenia patients; HC = healthy controls; H-FDR = HC-specific FDR; S-FDR = SCZ-specific FDR.
Lilliefors tests at the 1% level confirmed the normality of distribution of the classification scores of different groups.
