Alterations in intrinsic fronto-thalamo-parietal connectivity are associated with cognitive control deficits in psychotic disorders
Despite a growing number of reports about alterations in intrinsic/resting brain activity observed in patients with psychotic disorders, their relevance to well-established cognitive control deficits in this patient group is not well understood. 88 clinically stabilized patients with a psychotic disorder and 50 healthy controls participated in a resting-state magnetic resonance imaging study (rs-MRI) and performed an antisaccade task in the laboratory to assess voluntary inhibitory control ability. Deficits on this task are a well-established biomarker across psychotic disorders as we found in the present patient sample. First, regional cerebral function was evaluated by measuring the amplitude of low frequency fluctuations (ALFF) in rs-MRI BOLD signals. We found reduced ALFF in patients in regions known to be relevant to antisaccade task performance including bilateral frontal eye fields (FEF), supplementary eye fields (SEF) and thalamus. Second, areas with ALFF alterations were used as seed areas in whole-brain functional connectivity (FC) analysis. Altered FC was observed in a fronto-thalamo-parietal network that was associated with inhibition error rate in patients but not in controls. In contrast, faster time to generate a correct antisaccade was associated with FC in FEF and SEF in controls but this effect was not seen in patients. These findings establish a behavioural relevance of resting-state fMRI findings in psychotic disorders, and extend previous reports of alterations in fronto-thalamo-parietal network activation during antisaccade performance seen in task-based fMRI studies.
Introduction
There is an increasing number of reports from patients with psychotic disorders of altered resting state physiology and functional connectivity in intrinsic brain systems. Several studies suggest alterations in thalamo-cortical networks characterized by a pattern of reduced prefrontal-thalamic connectivity and increased motor and sensorimotor system connectivity with the thalamus. In line with this, we previously reported altered functional connectivity in fronto-thalamo-striatal circuitry as part of the Bipolar and Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate Phenotypes (B-SNIP) consortium study that was identified across patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders and psychotic bipolar disorder. While there are now many studies indicating altered resting brain physiology in psychotic disorders, the neurocognitive significance of these deficits such as in cognitive control remains to be well established.
One widely used approach to study voluntary cognitive control in psychiatric patients has been the antisaccade task, which requires the suppression of a reflexive saccadic eye movement to a visual target presented in the periphery, and then a voluntary saccade in opposite direction. Increased antisaccade error rates have been consistently reported across untreated first-episode and chronically ill medicated patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and psychotic bipolar disorder as well as in their unaffected relatives, supporting its use as a biomarker for psychotic disorders. We recently replicated and extended these findings in a large cohort of patients with psychotic disorders from the B-SNIP consortium.
From neurophysiological studies of nonhuman primates and human brain imaging studies, the specific neural networks supporting antisaccade performance have been established. This network includes the frontal and supplementary eye fields (FEF and SEF, respectively), the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), posterior parietal cortex (PPC), precuneus, anterior cingulate (ACC), and subcortical structures including the thalamus, basal ganglia, midbrain superior colliculus (SC) and cerebellum. Additionally, studies of nonhuman primates using single cell recordings have pointed out the importance of intrinsic brain activity in prefrontal-subcortical circuitry prior to trial onset as being critical for task performance.
In healthy human participants, antisaccade error rate and the latency of correct antisaccades have been associated with task-related changes in fronto-thalamo-parietal networks during active task performance. Resting state activity has only recently been related to antisaccade performance in healthy participants revealing associations of antisaccade error rate and response latency with modulations of resting state activity in orbitofrontal and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex as well as medial premotor regions.
By taking advantage of noninvasive imaging approaches, the psychoradiology (https://radiopaedia.org/articles/psychoradiology), a subfield of radiology, is increasingly of clinical importance in guiding diagnostic and therapeutic decision making in patients with mental disorders.This prior literature indicates the potential utility of using antisaccade task performance to establish the neurobehavioral relevance of resting-state fMRI data for cognitive control deficits in patients with serious mental illness. In patients with psychotic disorders, functional brain imaging studies have revealed abnormalities in fronto-thalamo-parietal networks during active antisaccade task performance that were associated with increased error rates independent from medication status. However, whether impairments of antisaccade performance in patients with psychotic disorders are also related to alterations of resting brain activity in fronto-thalamo-parietal brain systems remains to be established.
There were two hypotheses driving the present study. First, we predicted that increased antisaccade error rates in patients would be associated with reduced coherent activity in distinct brain regions associated with antisaccade performance, e.g. FEF, SEF and thalamus, and second that error rates would also be related to alterations of functional connectivity within this circuitry. Based on our previous findings of elevated antisaccade error rates across psychotic disorders in the B-SNIP sample and similar disturbances of resting state measures in task-relevant fronto-thalamo-striatal circuitry in clinically stable patients with schizophrenia-spectrum and bipolar disorders, we tested these hypotheses in a combined patient sample with both affective and non-affective psychotic disorders.
Material and methods
Subjects
Antisaccade performance was assessed in 88 patients with a psychotic disorder (schizophrenia N=32, schizoaffective disorder N=13, and bipolar disorder with psychotic features N=43) and 50 healthy control participants studied at the Chicago site of the B-SNIP consortium as described previously. Diagnoses were made by a consensus process using all available clinical information including the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM IV. Patients were clinically stable and receiving consistent psychopharmacological treatment for at least one month. Current symptoms and cognitive status were assessed using standard rating scales, Table I (Table I S).
Inclusion criteria for all subjects were: (1) age 15–65; (2) WRAT reading score ≥ 65; (3) no history of neurologic illness or systemic disease; (4) minimum of 20/40 acuity (with or without correction), (5) no history of substance abuse within the last month or substance dependence within the last three months, and negative urine toxicology on assessment day, (6) no potentially sedating medication, i.e. benzodiazepines, and (7) head translation <1.5mm and rotation <1.5° during fMRI scanning. Inclusion criteria for control subjects additionally included: (1) no personal or family history (first-degree relative) of psychotic or bipolar disorder; (2) no history of recurrent depression; and (3) no history of psychosis spectrum personality traits defined as meeting full or within one criteria of a Cluster A (psychosis spectrum) Axis-II diagnosis. The median time for completion of the full protocol was two days. T1 and T2 weighted magnetic resonance images were inspected by an experienced neuroradiologist to exclude significant structural abnormalities, e.g. tumors, in all participants. The study was approved by the institutional review board of the University of Illinois at Chicago and written informed consent was obtained prior to study participation.
Eye movement testing
Antisaccade testing and analysis procedures have been described in detail previously. Eye movements were acquired with a video-based eye tracker in a darkened room (Eyelink II, SR Research Ltd., Ontario/Canada, sampling rate 500 Hz). Before testing, participants refrained from nicotine or caffeine exposure for at least 30 minutes. They were seated 60 cm from a 22-inch CRT monitor (1360 × 768 resolution; 150 Hz refresh rate) with their heads stabilized with a chin and forehead restraint. The target was a red cross in a box covering 0.5°. The antisaccade task consisted of 80 overlap trials divided into four blocks. After a period of central fixation (1500 – 2500 msec), the central target was extinguished 200ms after peripheral target appearance at either 10° or 15° to the left or right from center. Subjects were instructed to not look to the peripheral target (antisaccade error) but instead immediately look to the mirror image location in the opposite hemi-field. The percentage of trials with antisaccade errors was recorded indicating failed inhibitory control. The mean latency of correct antisaccades for each subject was also determined, which reflects time to inhibit an antisaccade error and implement of task-appropriate correct goal-directed voluntary behavior.
Resting State fMRI Data Acquisition
Brain scans were conducted using a GE Signa EXCITE 3.0 Tesla MR imaging system and an 8-channel phased array head coil. Resting-state MR scanning was performed while subjects fixated a central crosshair for the duration of a 5-minute scan. Video monitoring of participants’ eyes confirmed adherence to this instruction. Soft ear plugs were used to reduce scan noise, and head motion was minimized with head cushions. During scanning, subjects were instructed to relax with eyes closed, without falling asleep and without directed, systematic thought. Echo-planar imaging (repetition time= 1775msec, echo time= 27msec, flip angle= 60°) was performed with slice thickness of 4 mm (1mm gap), a matrix size of 64×64 and a field of view of 220×220 mm², resulting in a voxel size for analysis of 3.44×3.44×5 mm. Each brain volume was comprised of 29 axial slices, and each functional run contained 210 image volumes.
Resting State Data Analyses
Amplitude of low frequency fluctuations (ALFF)
Pre-processing steps were performed using the Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI (DPARSF) toolbox that runs on the REST software platform (http://resting-fmri.sourceforge.net). The first five scans were discarded to establish magnetization stabilization. For each subject, EPI images were slice-timing corrected, and realigned to the middle slice. The Friston 24-parameter model was used to regress out head motion effects from the realigned data, which has demonstrated benefits in removing head motion effects in recent reports. Motion scrubbing was not applied to avoid the possibility of losing data leading to a biased estimate of further distant connectivity, specifically in visual and posterior parietal regions. Next, functional images were spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) EPI template in SPM8, resampled to 3×3×3mm³, and smoothed with an 6-mm full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. Measurement of the amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations of the BOLD signal (ALFF), considered to be related to regional spontaneous neural activity, was used to identify differences between the patient group and controls in regional resting cerebral function. After bandpass filtering (0.01–0.08 Hz), signals from white matter and cerebrospinal fluid were removed. Following linear detrending, the voxel-wise time series were transformed to the frequency domain using fast Fourier transformation to obtain the power spectrum. The ALFF measure at each voxel represents the square root of the power across a low-frequency range. The ALFF value of each voxel was divided by the global mean ALFF value of each individual subject to standardize data for comparisons across subjects.
Functional connectivity analysis
To investigate functional circuitry alterations, we first identified regional group differences of ALFF values. These were used to create seed regions for functional connectivity analyses by creating a spherical region of interest centered on the voxel with peak group difference in ALFF data that had a radius of 3mm. Voxels in the region of interest sphere were averaged to create the seed for FC analysis between eye movement relevant regions with altered ALFF values and the remainder of the brain.
The first step in the analysis was to extract a reference time series by obtaining the average of the time series of voxels within each sphere as described above. Correlations were then computed between the time series of the seed reference and all brain voxels outside the seed region. Finally, these correlation coefficients were transformed by Fisher r-to-z transformation to increase their normality before averaging correlations across participants and testing for associations with antisaccade task performance.
Statistical analyses
Voxel-based comparison of ALFF maps from patient and control groups was performed using pairwise t tests in SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ecl.ac.uk/spm). Age, sex and race were used as covariates in group comparisons. Connectivity was examined from the selected seed areas using pairwise t-tests comparing patients and controls. In all image analyses, a threshold of p=0.05 after AlphaSim correction was used to correct for multiple comparisons corresponding to a minimum cluster size of 80 contiguous voxels significant individually at a threshold of p<0.01. The AlphaSim calculation based on Monte Carlo simulations was conducted using REST software (http://restfmri.net/forum/index.php).
To determine relations between alterations of mean ALFF and FC values with antisaccade performance measures, we used stepwise backward regression analysis that allows for consideration of several independent variables simultaneously. This procedure yielded a regression model using imaging parameters to predict antisaccade performance with a significance threshold for entry of 0.05 and that for removal of 0.10. Standardized z-scores for antisaccade error rate and latency, derived from a normative regression approach described previously, were entered as dependent variables while mean values of peak coordinate-defined spherical regions of altered ALFF and altered FC clusters in patients were used as independent variables in these analyses.
Results
Behavioral findings
As expected following our previous studies including the full B-SNIP sample, antisaccade error rate was considerably increased in patients compared to controls in the sample available for this study (Table I). Error rate did not differ between the three patient groups (F(2,82) = 2.04, p = 0.14, Table I S). Despite increased antisaccade errors in patients, latencies of correct antisaccade responses did not differ between patients and controls, indicating that patients planned and initiated correct antisaccades as quickly as controls.
Alterations of ALFF and FC in patients
ALFF was reduced in patients compared to controls in FEF regions bilaterally, SEF region, and thalamus bilaterally, and in left orbitofrontal gyrus and left superior temporal gyrus (Table II). Given their adjacent midline location, left and right SEF were considered as one SEF region. Based on the established roles in eye movement activity of FEF, SEF and thalamus, these regions were selected as seed areas for FC analyses. Note that clusters of voxels in FC analyses with these seeds include areas defined previously in task-based fMRI studies using antisaccade paradigms but were in some instances larger.
FC analyses revealed a pattern of both increased and decreased connectivity in patients compared to controls. Table III lists all FC that differed between patients and controls.
Associations with antisaccade performance
Antisaccade error rate
In patients, ALFF power was not associated with antisaccade error rate in any oculomotor region, including FEF, SEF or thalamus (adjusted R2=0.0, standard error (S.E.)=1.34, F=2.03.59, p>0.05). However, higher antisaccade error rate was associated with lower FC from left FEF to left inferior parietal gyrus (IPG), bilateral precuneus (PCUN), left middle temporal gyrus (MTG) and right fusiform gyrus (FFG), and higher FC from left FEF to left angular gyrus (ANG). Higher FC from SEF to bilateral thalamus (THA) and lower FC from right thalamus to right parahippocampus (PHG) and left middle frontal gyrus (MFG) were also associated with higher antisaccade error rate in patients. Together these alterations in FC explained 34% of the variance in antisaccade error rate in patients (adjusted R2=0.34, S.E.=1.12, F=6.59, p<0.001, Table IV). Figure 1 illustrates the findings from regression analyses, note that FC in red indicate that stronger FC was associated with higher error rates while blue FC indicate weaker association with higher error rates.
In controls, higher antisaccade error rate was predicted by higher ALFF in left thalamus (THA) and lower ALFF in left FEF (adjusted R2=0.18, S.E.=0.77, F=6.45, p=0.003), Figure 1. In contrast to patients, error rates in controls were not associated with any FC differences between patients and controls (adjusted R2=0.0, S.E.=0.85, F=0.5, p>0.05).
Latency of correct antisaccades
There was only a weak association between antisaccade latency and resting state physiology in patients, Figure 2, with higher FC from right thalamus to bilateral cuneus (CUN) and lower FC from right thalamus to left middle frontal gyrus (MFG) predicting slower antisaccade processing speed (adjusted R2=0.09, S.E.=1.2, F=5.24, p=0.007).
In contrast, in controls, longer latency of correct antisaccades was predicted by lower FC from left FEF to right precuneus (PCUN) and to SEF and higher FC from left FEF to left MFG and left fusiform gyrus (FFG) (Figure 2). Additionally, longer antisaccade latency was predicted by higher FC from SEF to thalamus (THA) bilaterally and lower FC to anterior cingulate (ACC) bilaterally. Together, these FC patterns accounted for 27% of the variance in antisaccade latency in controls (adjusted R2=0.27, S.E.=0.78, F=3.95, p=0.003, Table IV). Note that in Figure 2, FC in red indicate that stronger FC was associated with longer latency while blue FC indicate weaker FC associated with longer latency. Antisaccade latency was not associated with ALFF in any oculomotor region in controls (adjusted R2=0.0, S.E.=0.90, F=1.3, p>0.05).
Associations with clinical variables
Alterations in regional ALFF and FC measures, which were associated with error rate and antisaccade latency, were not correlated with antipsychotic medication dosage, i.e. chlorpromazine equivalents. Associations with clinical ratings were modest, consistent with the prior literature. PANSS scores only correlated with FC between SEF and bilateral thalamus (PANSSTotal r=0.39, p<0.001, PANSSPositive r=0.36, p=0.001 PANSSNegative r=0.26, p=0.02) but not with any other clinical rating or ALFF measures.
Discussion
There are two important aspects to our findings from this first study to investigate associations of alterations of resting state brain physiology in fronto-thalamo-parietal networks with the well-established biomarker of increased antisaccade error rates in patients with psychosis. First, our results indicate a behavioural relevance of altered resting state brain function in psychotic disorders, specifically to deficits in cognitive control. Second, our findings demonstrate that increased inhibition error rates in patients with psychotic disorders are related to predominantly weaker functional connectivity in intrinsic fronto-thalamo-parietal brain systems rather than to altered local activity in oculomotor areas such as FEF, SEF or thalamus.
In secondary analyses, we studied the relation between intrinsic brain activity and processing speed required to generate correct antisaccade responses. Consistent with studies in nonhuman primates, volitional saccadic behavior in controls was supported by a widely distributed fronto-thalamo-parietal network that includes the anterior cingulate. In patients, processing speed was associated with fewer significant functional connections in this circuitry.
Together, our findings extend previous reports from patients with psychosis showing alterations in a fronto-thalamo-parietal network during active antisaccade performance in task-based fMRI studies. Thus, our findings provide new understanding of the brain substrate of this familial abnormality associated with psychotic disorders by providing novel evidence that similar network alterations are seen in resting-state studies and that connectivity alterations rather than altered regional activity are more related to this domain of behavioural deficit on a task where resting physiology prior to trial onset is known to be an important factor relevant to task performance.
Previous rs-MRI studies from patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and psychotic bipolar disorder demonstrated disruptions of intrinsic cortical network organization and integration including the sensorimotor network guiding attention and action towards external sensory stimuli, the fronto-parietal network subserving executive control, and the default mode network. The areas with reduced ALFF in patients that we used as seed areas form part of the fronto-striatal sensorimotor network including FEF and SEF regions, and thalamus. As expected, we found that ALFF in FEF and thalamus was directly related to antisaccade error rates in controls, a finding that is in line with results from a large meta-analyses that included the few rs-MRI studies in addition to fMRI studies with active antisaccade performance. It suggests that high intrinsic activity in FEF and low activity in thalamus contribute to keeping saccade inhibition error rates low. These associations were not significant in patients. Instead, error rates were associated with several measures of functional connectivity, including connectivity from FEF to nodes in the default mode network comprising inferior parietal gyrus, the angular gyrus, precuneus and middle temporal gyrus. Other inhibition error related connectivity alterations in patients involved connections between thalamus and both SEF and parahippocampus, as well as the fronto-parietal connections including the DLPFC as part of the middle frontal gyrus (MFG). To understand the relation between altered functional connectivity within these brain systems and disturbances of inhibitory reflexive control, it is important to consider the specific oculomotor functions of the relevant brain regions.
Connectivity alterations between regions of specific oculomotor function
The FEF represents the core cortical hub related to saccade generation. It has connections throughout the brain where cortical saccade planning and generation of oculomotor commands are coded. Functional FEF alterations have previously been suggested in psychotic disorders by eye movement laboratory studies and task-based saccade fMRI studies. Second, the SEF is known to be important in higher order saccade control such as in visuomotor sequence learning and prediction. Third, the thalamus is known to play important roles in cortical connectivity generally, and fronto-striatal systems in particular, and to be involved in visual information processing. Together, the FEF, the SEF and the thalamus represent core areas of the oculomotor cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loop that is integrated with wider networks including the PPC, precuneus, cuneus and angular gyrus, all of which are important for the spatial inversion of the visual target to its mirror position required for antisaccade generation. The DLPFC has been frequently implicated in antisaccade execution although its specific role is still not fully understood. It shows strong functional connectivity within the fronto-parietal network in resting state studies projecting directly and indirectly to SC to mediate top-down resting and excitatory control over SC neurons. Others have shown that components of the default mode network including the middle temporal gyrus and the inferior parietal cortex, as well as the parahippocampus, are also involved in active antisaccade generation.
Alterations in FEF connectivity related to inhibition error rate
Our findings of weaker intrinsic connectivity strength from FEF to inferior parietal gyrus, precuneus and middle temporal gyrus predicting higher rates of antisaccade errors in patients suggest that increased inhibition errors are at least partly driven by alterations in intrinsic brain systems supporting visuospatial attention and their relation to sensorimotor transformation and volitional behavioral control. Notably, higher functional connectivity between FEF and angular gyrus predicted higher inhibition errors in patients, implying a higher tone of sensorimotor integration that might reduce the ability to suppress saccade responses to visual target presentation. Angular gyrus dysfunction has been shown to result in laterality discrimination difficulties that may impact generation of an antisaccade to the mirror position.
Alterations in thalamus connectivity related to inhibition error rate
We also observed stronger connectivity between thalamus and SEF, and weaker connectivity between thalamus and DLPFC in MFG at rest that predicted higher error rates in patients, Figure 1. This finding reflects an imbalance in the higher order control of sensorimotor systems, with more input from premotor cortex and less from prefrontal cortex. It is in line with a very recent study using rs-MRI showing a pattern of increased connectivity between sensorimotor cortex, i.e. SEF, and thalamus on the one hand and decreased connectivity between thalamus and prefrontal areas being related to proactive response inhibition. Heightened thalamic interaction with SEF might also serve to increase resting tone in saccade generation systems, which would have the effect of reducing the ability to inhibit responses to sensory input. In the language of stop signal models, this could bias the system to respond to input which would reduce the ability of top down control to inhibit prosaccade responses, which might already be reduced by lowered DLPFC connectivity. Of note, the higher connectivity between SEF and thalamus was the only connection that correlated with higher symptom expression on PANSS scores indicating a possible association with illness severity, which itself has previously been linked to antisaccade performance.
Intrinsic brain systems for processing speed of correct antisaccades
Processing speed in controls was influenced by connectivity from FEF and SEF to cognitively-relevant frontal regions including DLPFC in MFG and ACC, two regions highly implicated in antisaccade control and cognitive control generally. Stronger connectivity being related to longer processing time could reflect task specific involvement of the DLPFC for contextual processing and evaluation of error responses for performance optimization in ACC. On the other hand, faster processing speed was related to stronger connectivity from FEF and SEF to thalamus and the precuneus which mediate visuospatial attention and remapping required for antisaccade performance.
Limitations
First, combining patients with psychotic disorders as implemented in the B-SNIP study was planned based on previous laboratory antisaccade studies and resting state studies across disorders to increase the power of analyses. In the present sample, there was no difference between groups regarding antisaccade error rates supporting the hypothesis that increased error rates represent a more general biomarker across psychotic disorders. However, future studies with larger samples are needed to reveal specific differences of alterations in fronto-thalamo-parietal networks associated with antisaccade error rate between psychotic disorders. Second, we found a relative independence of intrinsic brain activity from current medications and symptom expression. This may in part be due to the fact that by design, our patients were relatively clinically stable and on stable pharmacological treatment. Third, to control for possible confounds by head motion participants with head translation >1.5mm and rotation >1.5° during fMRI scanning were excluded and head motion parameters were additionally used as covariates. However, possible effects of this confound cannot be fully excluded.
The findings from this study support a linkage between a well-established biomarker for psychotic disorders and alterations in intrinsic brain systems subserving this behavior. Our findings provide novel evidence that disturbances in these brain systems at rest contribute to impaired antisaccade task performance. Future studies are needed to unravel how alterations in resting state activity contribute to other cognitive control deficits in psychotic disorders, and whether there are informative genetic associations with these alterations.
Supplementary Material
           Conflict of interests         
All authors have declared no conflicts of interest in relation to the subject of this study.
Carol A. Tamminga reports the following financial disclosures:
American Psychiatric Association – Deputy Editor; Astellas – Ad Hoc Consultant; Autifony – Ad Hoc Consultant; The Brain and Behavior Foundation – Council Member; Eli Lilly Pharmaceuticals – Ad Hoc Consultant; Intra-cellular Therapies (ITI, Inc.) – Advisory Board, drug development; Institute of Medicine – Council Member; National Academy of Medicine – Council Member; Pfizer – Ad Hoc Consultant; Sunovion -- Investigator Initiated grant funding.
References
Basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits: parallel substrates for motor, oculomotor, “prefrontal” and “limbic” functions
Antipsychotic dose equivalents and dose-years: a standardized method for comparing exposure to different drugs
Disruption of cortical association networks in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder
Frontoparietal activation with preparation for antisaccades
Isolation of saccade inhibition processes: rapid event-related fMRI of saccades and nogo trials
The brain’s default network: origins and implications for the study of psychosis
Different involvement of subregions within dorsal premotor and medial frontal cortex for pro- and antisaccades
Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in “resting-state” data
Neural networks related to pro-saccades and anti-saccades revealed by independent component analysis
Volumetric neural correlates of antisaccade eye movements in first-episode psychosis
Smooth pursuit and antisaccade eye movements in siblings discordant for schizophrenia

Movement-related effects in fMRI time-series
Hyperfrontality in patients with schizophrenia during saccade and antisaccade tasks: a study with fMRI
Review of thalamocortical resting-state fMRI studies in schizophrenia
Longitudinal studies of antisaccades in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia
Response suppression deficits in treatment-naive first-episode patients with schizophrenia, psychotic bipolar disorder and psychotic major depression
Activation of frontoparietal cortices during memorized triple-step sequences of saccadic eye movements: an fMRI study
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of sensorimotor transformations in saccades and antisaccades
TMS over the left angular gyrus impairs the ability to discriminate left from right
Functional specialization within macaque dorsolateral prefrontal cortex for the maintenance of task rules and cognitive control
The antisaccade task as a research tool in psychopathology: a critical review
Intrinsic Connectivity Provides the Baseline Framework for Variability in Motor Performance: A Multivariate Fusion Analysis of Low- and High-Frequency Resting-State Oscillations and Antisaccade Performance
Quantitative meta-analysis of fMRI and PET studies reveals consistent activation in fronto-striatal-parietal regions and cerebellum during antisaccades and prosaccades
Behavioral and Neural Plasticity of Ocular Motor Control: Changes in Performance and fMRI Activity Following Antisaccade Training
Macaque dorsolateral prefrontal cortex does not suppress saccade-related activity in the superior colliculus
Poor performance in smooth pursuit and antisaccadic eye-movement tasks in healthy siblings of patients with schizophrenia
The positive and negative syndrome scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia
Disease and drug effects on internally-generated and externally-elicited responses in first episode schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder
Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies of eye movements in first episode schizophrenia: smooth pursuit, visually guided saccades and the oculomotor delayed response task
Norms and standardization of the Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS)
Effects of unilateral deactivations of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex on saccadic eye movements
Prefrontal cortex deactivation in macaques alters activity in the superior colliculus and impairs voluntary control of saccades
Longitudinal Changes in Resting-State Cerebral Activity in Patients with First-Episode Schizophrenia: A 1-Year Follow-up Functional MR Imaging Study
Psychoradiology: the frontier of neuroimaging in psychiatry
Resting-state brain function in schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar probands and their first-degree relatives
The Contribution of Network Organization and Integration to the Development of Cognitive Control
Neural correlates of refixation saccades and antisaccades in normal and schizophrenia subjects
Measuring liability for schizophrenia using optimized antisaccade stimulus parameters
A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change
Consistency of network modules in resting-state FMRI connectome data
Functional neuroanatomy of antisaccade eye movements investigated with positron emission tomography
Rostral and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex make dissociable contributions during antisaccade error commission
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion
Antisaccade performance in schizophrenia patients, their first-degree biological relatives, and community comparison subjects: data from the COGS study
Neuronal substrate of the saccadic inhibition deficit in schizophrenia investigated with 3-dimensional event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging
Elevated antisaccade error rate as an intermediate phenotype for psychosis across diagnostic categories
Reduced attentional engagement contributes to deficits in prefrontal inhibitory control in schizophrenia
An improved framework for confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of resting-state functional connectivity data
Antisaccade performance predicted by neuronal activity in the supplementary eye field
The angular gyrus: multiple functions and multiple subdivisions
Primate supplementary eye field. II. Comparative aspects of connections with the thalamus, corpus striatum, and related forebrain nuclei
Functional neuroanatomy of anticipatory behavior: dissociation between sensory-driven and memory-driven systems
Influence of the thalamus on spatial visual processing in frontal cortex
fMRI studies of eye movement control: investigating the interaction of cognitive and sensorimotor brain systems
Eye tracking abnormalities in schizophrenia: evidence for dysfunction in the frontal eye fields
Positron emission tomography study of voluntary saccadic eye movements and spatial working memory
Facing competition: Neural mechanisms underlying parallel programming of antisaccades and prosaccades
Clinical phenotypes of psychosis in the Bipolar-Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate Phenotypes (B-SNIP)
Reduced functional connectivity in a right-hemisphere network for volitional ocular motor control in schizophrenia
Cortico-striatal disconnection within the cingulo-opercular network in schizophrenia revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity analysis: a resting fMRI study
Frontal eye field, where art thou? Anatomy, function, and non-invasive manipulation of frontal regions involved in eye movements and associated cognitive operations
Microstimulation of monkey dorsolateral prefrontal cortex impairs antisaccade performance
Disconnected and Hyperactive: A Replication of Sensorimotor Cortex Abnormalities in Patients With Schizophrenia During Proactive Response Inhibition

A comprehensive assessment of regional variation in the impact of head micromovements on functional connectomics
A rating scale for mania: reliability, validity and sensitivity
Neurobiological basis of head motion in brain imaging
ALFF and FC measurements associated with antisaccade error rate in patients and controls. Dots identify the location of peak group differences within clusters (Table III). FEF frontal eye field region, SEF supplementary eye field region, THA thalamus, MFG middle frontal gyrus; IPG inferior parietal gyrus; PCUN precuneus; ANG angular gyrus; MTG middle temporal gyrus; PHG parahippocampal gyrus; FFG fusiform gyrus; L left; R right. Red lines indicate that stronger FC was associated with higher error rates while blue lines indicate that weaker FC was associated with higher error rates.
ALFF and FC measurements associated with latency of correct antisaccades in patients and controls. Dots identify the location of peak group differences within clusters (Table III). FEF frontal eye field region, SEF supplementary eye field region, THA thalamus, MFG middle frontal gyrus; ACC, anterior cingulate gyrus; CUN cuneus; PCUN precuneus; FFG fusiform gyrus, L left; R right. Red lines indicate that stronger FC was associated with longer latency while blue lines indicate that weaker FC was associated with longer latency.
Characteristics of patients with psychosis and healthy controls
	Psychosis Patients N=88	Healthy Controls N=50	Comparison	 	Age, Mean (SD)	33 (12.5)	35.0 (12.5)	n.s.	 	Sex (% Male)	57%	39%	n.s.	 	% Caucasian	57%	60%	n.s.	 	% African-American	32%	26%	n.s.	 	WRAT 4 Word Readinga, Mean (SD)	100.3 (16.1)	103.5 (14.4)	n.s.	 	BACSb, Mean z-scores (SD)	−1.1 (1.4)	0.2 (1.0)	t(136)=5.4; p<0.001	 	PANSSc Positive, Mean (SD)	15.8 (5.3)			 	PANSSc Negative, Mean (SD)	16.1 (6.0)			 	PANSSc Total, Mean (SD)	65.3 (16.4)			 	YMRSd, Mean (SD)	6.3 (6.1)			 	MADRSe, Mean (SD)	10.8 (8.9)			 	Medication status				 	Chlorpromazine Equivalentsf, Mean (SD)	325mg (296)			 	Antidepressants, N (%)	45 (51%)			 	Mood Stabilizer, N (%)	39 (44%)			 	Antisaccade performance				 	Error Rate, Mean (SD)	31% (20)	18% (12)	t(136)=−4.35; p<0.001	 	Antisaccade Latency, Mean (SD)	385ms (74)	386ms (54)	n.s.	 	
Wide Range Achievement Test 4th - Edition: Reading 
Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia, z-scores are given relative to norms
Positive and Negative Symptom Scale 
Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale 
Young Mania Rating Scale 
According to 
Regions with altered ALFF values in whole brain analyses in patients with psychosis (N=88) compared to healthy controls (N=50)
	MINI coordinates: peak voxel	Cluster size	p-values*	 	Location	x	y	z			 	Patients < Controls						 	FEF region, left	−39	−24	54	717	<0.001	 	FEF region, right	63	−12	36	339	<0.001	 	SEF region	−6	−12	45	152	0.01	 	Thalamus, left	−12	−12	3	101	0.03	 	Thalamus, right	15	−12	9	155	0.01	 	Orbitofrontal gyrus, left	−15	36	−9	113	0.02	 	Superior temporal gyrus, left	−54	−36	21	107	0.03	 	
ALFF Amplitude of low frequency fluctuations, MNI Montreal Neurological Institute, SD standard deviation, FEF frontal eye fields, SEF supplementary eye fields
A threshold of p=0.05 after AlphaSim correction was used to correct for multiple comparisons using a minimum cluster size of 80 contiguous voxels significant individually at a threshold of p<0.01.
Altered functional connectivity (FC) within oculomotor fronto-thalamo circuitry in patients with psychosis (N=88) compared to healthy controls (N=50)
		MINI coordinates: of peak voxel	Cluster size	p	 	Seed area	Clusters with altered FC	x	y	z			 	Patients > Controls	 	FEF region, left	Caudate, bilateral	15	12	−3	4450	<0.001	 		Inferior parietal gyrus, left	−57	−42	39	261	0.007	 		Inferior parietal gyrus, right	60	−39	48	340	0.003	 		Precuneus, right	9	−72	45	172	0.022	 		Middle frontal gyrus, left	−36	48	15	281	0.005	 	FEF region, right	Thalamus, bilateral	18	−24	6	1310	<0.001	 	Thalamus, left	FEF region, bilateral	−48	−6	21	3721	<0.001	 	Thalamus, right	FEF region, bilateral	−51	−9	24	5574	<0.001	 		Parahippocampus, right	27	−21	−30	218	0.017	 		Cuneus, bilateral	−12	−75	27	256	0.011	 	SEF region	Thalamus, bilateral	21	−24	3	1212	<0.001	 		Anterior cingulate, bilateral	9	36	21	368	0.002	 	Patients < Controls	 	FEF region, left	Angular gyrus, left	−48	−75	39	273	0.006	 		SEF region	−6	−39	75	1362	<0.001	 		Precuneus, bilateral	−3	−48	9	473	0.001	 		Fusiform gyrus, right	42	−18	−24	204	0.014	 		Middle temporal gyrus, left	−57	−27	−3	421	0.001	 	FEF region, right	Superior temporal gyrus, left	−54	−12	6	350	0.003	 	Thalamus, right	Middlle frontal gyrus, right	30	57	12	506	0.001	 		Middle frontal gyrus, left	−36	36	48	149	0.043	 	
MNI Montreal Neurological Institute, FEF frontal eye field, SEF supplementary eye field,

          Associations of resting state activity with antisaccade measures in patients with psychotic disorders (N=88) and controls (N=50)
          *
        
Antisaccade error rate	 	Patients	Beta	t	p-value	 	FC FEF region, left, to	Inferior parietal gyrus, left	−0.16	−1.68	0.09	 		Angular gyrus, left	0.31	3.10	0.003	 		Precuneus, bilateral	−0.38	−3.54	0.001	 		Gyrus fusiformis, right	−0.23	−2.42	0.02	 		Middle temporal gyrus, left	−0.19	−1.93	0.06	 	FC SEF to	Thalamus, bilareral	0.27	2.90	0.005	 	FC Thalamus, right, to	Parahippocampus, right	−0.43	−4.41	<0.001	 		Middle frontal gyrus, left	−0.20	−2.12	0.04	 	Controls				 	ALFF in FEF region, left		−0.27	−2.03	0.05	 	ALFF in Thalamus, left		0.43	3.27	0.002	 	Latency of correct antisaccades	 	Patients	Beta	t	p-value	 	FC Thalamus, right, to	Cuneus, bilateral	−0.25	−2.44	0.02	 		Middle frontal gyrus, left	0.18	1.74	0.09	 	Controls				 	FC FEF region, left, to	Precuneus, right	−0.32	−2.54	0.02	 		Middle frontal gyrus, left	0.38	2.58	0.01	 		SEF	−0.25	−1.78	0.08	 		Fusiform gyrus, right	0.29	2.07	0.05	 	FC SEF to	Thalamus, bilateral	0.31	2.13	0.04	 		Anterior cingulate, bilateral	−0.50	−3.25	0.002	 	
Table depicts results from backwards regression analyses using ALFF and FC values as independent variables to predict antisaccade error rate and latency of correct antisaccades, respectively. Only results from final models that together best predicted antisaccade measures are shown.
