Abnormal fronto-limbic engagement in incarcerated stimulant users during moral processing
Rationale
Stimulant use is a significant and prevalent problem, particularly in criminal populations. Previous studies found that cocaine and methamphetamine use is related to impairment in identifying emotions and empathy. Stimulant users also have abnormal neural structure and function of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), amygdala, anterior (ACC) and posterior cingulate (PCC), regions implicated in moral decision making. However, no research has studied the neural correlates of stimulant use and explicit moral processing in an incarcerated population.
Objectives
Here we examine how stimulant use affects sociomoral processing that might contribute to antisocial behavior. We predicted that vmPFC, amygdala, PCC, and ACC would show abnormal neural response during a moral processing task in incarcerated methamphetamine and cocaine users.
Methods
Incarcerated adult males (N = 211) were scanned with a Mobile MRI system while completing a moral decision making task. Lifetime drug use was assessed. Neural responses during moral processing were compared between users and non-users. The relationship between duration of use and neural function was also examined.
Results
Incarcerated stimulant users showed less amygdala engagement than non-users during moral processing. Duration of stimulant use was negatively associated with activity in ACC and positively associated with vmPFC response during moral processing.
Conclusions
These results suggest a dynamic pattern of fronto-limbic moral processing related to stimulant use with deficits in both central motive and cognitive integration elements of biological moral processes theory. This increases our understanding of how drug use relates to moral processing in the brain in an ultra-high risk population.
Substance abuse is a staggering problem, costing the United States up to $11 billion dollars in annual health care costs alone. When considering other factors, such as crime and lost productivity, the cost is more than ten times that. In addition to the societal costs, users of stimulants, such as cocaine and methamphetamine, have significant lifetime prevalence rates, with over 15% of all adults in the United States having used cocaine and upwards of 5% having used methamphetamine. Additionally, 1.5 million people in the United States are current cocaine users while nearly 600,000 are current methamphetamine users, nearly tripling the number of current users since 2011. Meanwhile, nearly 50% of prison inmates report having used cocaine or methamphetamine in their lifetimes. Additionally, 12% report being high on cocaine while committing their crime while an additional 6% of inmates report using methamphetamine at the time of offense.
As might be expected given the relation between stimulant use and crime, research has suggested that stimulant abusers show deficits in several types of socio-affective processes that are related to moral judgement and prosocial behavior. Both active and abstinent stimulant users have difficulty identifying others’ emotions, particularly fear. Additionally, stimulant use is related to diminished empathy and perspective taking, abilities that play an important role in moral decision making.
In addition to behavioral deficits, chronic stimulant users exhibit abnormal neural engagement in both top down and bottom up processes, such as significantly reduced activation compared to controls in the anterior cingulate (ACC), prefrontal cortex, and posterior cingulate (PCC) during response inhibition, prediction, and stress imagery. Abusers of both illicit and non-illicit stimulants also show increased ACC activity during reward cues and less amygdala and prefrontal cortex activations during delay discounting, although another study of intertemporal choice found less activation in methamphetamine users compared to controls in the dorsal ACC. This pattern of both hypo- and hyper-activations in various brain regions is thought to reflect neurocognitive impairments and compensatory cognitive processes, respectively.
Anatomical imaging studies have found that chronic stimulant use is associated with reduced gray matter in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), insula, and temporal cortex. Reductions have also been detected in other frontal regions including anterior and posterior cingulate as well as the amygdala. These patterns of structural abnormalities combine with functional work to suggest a pattern of frontocorticol deficits in chronic methamphetamine users.
Several of the regions implicated in functional and anatomical imaging studies of stimulant use, particularly the vmPFC, amygdala, PCC, and ACC, are consistently engaged during moral judgments in non-clinical populations. During moral processing in the brain, event sequences are stored in the prefrontal cortex and then represented in the vmPFC. Meanwhile, emotional experiences are represented in limbic regions such as the amygdala and PCC. The connections between these regions enable moral decisions, with the ACC playing an important role coordinating reinforcement, affect, and executive action. Additionally, the PCC is engaged during evaluative behavior such as theory of mind, self-reflection, and emotion integration during moral decision-making. Thus, poor decision making, including antisocial behavior, in stimulant users may be related to abnormalities in the neural network responsible for evaluating and making decisions about moral situations. Work with methamphetamine users has found evidence of functional connectivity deficits between frontal and corticolimbic regions leading to risky decision making and impulsivity.
Only two studies to date have directly examined how stimulant users’ brains process morally-salient stimuli. In one study, cocaine users who were participating in an inpatient treatment program, relative to non-cocaine users, showed lower task related activity in the dorsal ACC while evaluating moral dilemmas. Additionally, in previous work we found that abstinent, incarcerated cocaine-users, relative to non-using incarcerated controls, had lower activation in the ACC and vmPFC during implicit moral processing. Implicit moral processing triggers automatic moral processes but does not have moral task demands (e.g., shows a picture of a murder scene and asks if the scene is inside or outside.) However, to our knowledge, no study to date has investigated the neural correlates of explicit (i.e., having moral task demands) moral judgment in incarcerated methamphetamine abusers, despite the fact that many addicts become incarcerated at some point in their lives and 75% of inmates have substance abuse problems, according to epidemiological studies.
Here we examined moral processing in cocaine and methamphetamine chronic users in a large incarcerated sample, allowing us to assess the effects of chronic stimulant use not confounded by acute use and compared to a control group matched on incarceration and background. We hypothesized that incarcerated individuals with a history of chronic stimulant use, compared to incarcerated individuals with no history of regular stimulant use, would show reduced activation in the ACC, PCC, amygdala, and vmPFC when making moral judgments about morally controversial issues. These regions have been found to be significantly engaged in non-incarcerated, non-substance abusing individuals during moral processing and are related to abnormal grey matter volume and function in chronic substance users (see discussion above).. We also predicted that duration of stimulant use, quantified by years of regular cocaine and methamphetamine use, would be related to more pronounced abnormalities in these regions.
Methods
Participants
Participants were adult males incarcerated in New Mexico and Wisconsin prisons (N= 211). Inclusion criteria were: age between 18 and 65, IQ of 80 or above, at least 4th grade English reading level, and no history of neurological disorder or history of psychosis in self or first-degree relative. Participants with a history of regular stimulant use (n = 131) were compared to participants with no history of regular stimulant use (n = 80). Characteristics of each group are provided in Table 1.
All participants provided written, informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study and were compensated at an hourly rate comparable to pay rates for work within the facilities. All procedures and materials were approved by the University of New Mexico Institutional Review Board (IRB) and thus have been performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Assessments
Substance use was assessed using a modified version of the Addiction Severity Index (ASI-X), in which participants were asked about characteristics of use for a variety of substance classes, including age of first use and years of regular use (defined as three or more times a week). If a participant had any regular use of cocaine or methamphetamine in his lifetime, he was classified as a lifetime stimulant user. This was also used to quantify lifetime years of regular non-stimulant drug and alcohol use. Although methamphetamine and cocaine are distinct substances, both are stimulant class and there is precedent for examining their use together [i.e., ], as well as evidence that the substances have similar trajectories, effects on the brain and outcomes.
In addition to the ASI-X, we collected additional measures to quantify possible confounding factors as well as to evaluate for the exclusion criteria discussed above. Smoking was assessed using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence. IQ was estimated using the Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning subtests of the Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS). Because stimulant use is likely to be comorbid with psychopathy, psychopathy and stimulant abuse show overlapping brain regions of decreased structure/function, and psychopathy is higher among incarcerated versus non-incarcerated individuals, psychopathy was assessed in all study participants using the Hare Psychopathy Checklist- Revised (PCL-R). The PCL-R is the most widely used assessment of psychopathy in forensic populations, consisting of a semi-structured interview on topics such as interpersonal style and criminal history. Participants are scored on a scale of 0–40, where higher scores indicate stronger psychopathic traits. Psychiatric histories were assessed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV disorders (SCID) both to evaluate psychotic disorders for exclusion purposes and to evaluate other Axis I disorders. All interviews were conducted by trained research staff.
Moral task
Participants were shown words and phrases describing moral acts or concepts adapted from a task previously developed and validated by. Fifty stimuli were classified as noncontroversial negative (e.g., murder, slavery), fifty were classified as noncontroversial positive (e.g., charity, kindness), and fifty were classified as controversial (e.g., animal testing, gun control). Controversial stimuli required more processing than noncontroversial stimuli; this was confirmed in our study by an increased response time to the stimuli. Participants were presented with a given stimulus and asked to press one button to indicate they thought the word or phrase was morally wrong and a different button to indicate that they thought the stimuli was morally not wrong. After the button was pressed, a black screen was shown jittered for 1 to 6 seconds. Three runs of the task were administered, each including 50 stimuli evenly divided amongst stimulus types.
MRI data acquisition
Participants were scanned using the Mind Research Network’s 1.5T Siemens Avanto mobile MRI scanner stationed at correctional facilities. The scans were acquired using an EPI gradient-echo pulse sequence (parameters: repetition time (TR) 2000, echo time (TE) 39 ms, flip angle 75°, FOV 24 x 24 cm, 64 x 64 matrix, 4 mm slice thickness with a 1mm gap, 27 slices). The task was presented using E-Prime software. A T1-weighted scan was collected (parameters: TR 2530, TE 1.64 ms, 3.50ms, 5.36ms, 7.22ms, inversion time = 1100 ms, flip angle 7°, slice thickness = 1.3mm, 256 x 256 matrix), but it was not used in any of the functional MRI post-processing.
Image preprocessing and analyses
Imaging data were preprocessed with Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM). Head motion was corrected using the ArtRepair Toolbox in SPM to identify and remove severe artifacts, defined as time points with signal change greater than 4% of the global mean signal, then INRIAlign to estimate head motion using an algorithm that is insensitive to eye movements and blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) activity. We then spatially normalized images to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template and smoothed with an 8 mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel. A high-pass filter removed low-frequency drift below 1/128 Hertz.
We modeled two conditions of interest at the single-subject level using the general linear model (GLM). These conditions were controversial and noncontroversial (including both positive and negative stimuli). We examined the conditions time-locked to participant response. At the group-level, the conditions of interest were compared using a one-sample t-test (controversial > noncontroversial). The main effects of this analysis replicated previous use of this task in healthy controls.
We then used a two sample t-test to compare BOLD responses for this contrast between the lifetime stimulant use group and non-stimulant use group. Additionally, we examined the impact of stimulant use duration on moral processing by regressing total years of regular stimulant use in a separate statistical analysis using only participants in the lifetime stimulant use group. This stimulant use duration measure may in part quantify stimulant use severity.
We did not use years of non-stimulant substance and alcohol use as a covariate in our primary group comparisons because it was significantly different between groups; this means that including it as a covariate would remove variance from the group difference, not the error variance. In order to control for confounding variables in the regression model only, we used years of non-stimulant substance and alcohol use as a covariate in the regression of hemodynamic response by stimulant use duration; we also added age ( significantly related to duration of stimulant use: r = .272, p = .002, two-tailed Pearson, and PCL-R Total score to the model, but did not see substantive differences in the results.
To test our hypotheses, a priori brain regions of interest (ROIs) were examined including the ACC, PCC, amygdala, and vmPFC. Anatomical masks of these regions were generated from Wake Forest University Pick Atlas in SPM. A small-volume correction (SVC) was applied to determine the corrected p-values based on the size of each ROI using family wise error (FWE) rate correction for multiple comparisons. ROIs are represented in Figure 1. Additionally, a whole brain analysis corrected using FWE at p < .05 was conducted to examine areas outside our a priori regions of interest.
In order to understand the contribution of cocaine and methamphetamine use to the overall stimulant use effects, we ran additional analyses with the same contrast, covariates, and ROIs. The analyses were as follows: 1) lifetime cocaine users (n = 118) versus non-cocaine users (n = 93); 2) lifetime methamphetamine users (n = 72) versus non-methamphetamine users (n = 139); 3) duration of lifetime cocaine use (n = 118); and 4) duration of lifetime methamphetamine use (n = 72).
Results
Lifetime Stimulant Users versus Non-Stimulant Users
Stimulant users did not significantly differ from non-stimulant users on behavioral task performance, including response times and number of “wrong” vs. “not wrong” responses for any of the conditions of interest (i.e. controversial & non-controversial stimuli; Table 2). These results did not change when years of non-stimulant and alcohol use was included as a covariate.
When making decisions about controversial moral phrases, lifetime stimulant users showed less hemodynamic activity in the right amygdala relative to non-stimulant users (x = 30, y = −3, z = −27, t = −3.13, k = 51, p = .026 FWE corrected). This same cluster was significant at a trend level in lifetime cocaine users compared to non-users (k = 49, t = −2.80, p = .055 FWE corrected). No results in the whole brain analysis survived correction for multiple comparisons.
Duration of Lifetime Stimulant Use
Duration of lifetime stimulant use was not significantly associated with response times or number of “wrong” vs. “not wrong” responses in any of the conditions of interest (i.e., controversial & non-controversial stimuli; Table 2). These results did not change when years of non-stimulant use was not included as a covariate.
In the regression, years of stimulant use was inversely related to hemodynamic response in the ACC (x = −15, y = 21, z = 27, k = 29, t = −3.68, p = .042 FWE corrected; Table 4). Years of cocaine use was also inversely related to engagement in that region, although at a trend level (x = −15, y = 18, z = 27, k = 24, t = −3.53, p = .061 FWE corrected). Years of methamphetamine use were positively associated with hemodynamic response in the vmPFC (x = 6, y = 63, z = 15, k = 72, t = 3.69, p = .049 FWE corrected). No results in the whole brain analysis survived correction for multiple comparisons. These results did not change when years of non-stimulant use was included as a covariate. None of the results are presented as Figures? Was this always the case?
Discussion
Here we investigated how stimulant use affects hemodynamic activity related to moral processing in an ultra-high risk population. We found that duration of stimulant use was inversely related to caudal ACC activity, driven by cocaine use duration, while methamphetamine use duration was positively associated with vmPFC engagement. Additionally, regular stimulant users, relative to non-regular users, had hypoactivity in the right amygdala, driven by cocaine use in particular. These regions have essential roles in moral processing and emotional regulation.
The amygdala functions as a center for affective information during moral processing, interacting with goal oriented knowledge structures in the mPFC. Here we found abnormal responses within this system. An increase in vmPFC activity and decrease in amygdala activity is a typical pattern of hemodynamic response during emotional down regulation. This may reflect a specific deficit in the emotion regulation element of sociomoral processing; whereas non-stimulant users use a balance of emotional and cognitive resources to make moral decisions, stimulant users may be overly reliant on cognitive systems and downregulate emotional processes when arriving at a judgment.
An alternative explanation is that either the amygdala or the ACC alone has less engagement in stimulant users, but reciprocal connections between those regions account for the reduction in hemodynamic response in the other. Rather than a deficit in cognitive control, stimulant users may also find morally controversial issues less salient or may have poor emotional insight, eliciting a weaker amygdala response that requires less cognitive override. Connectivity studies have found that the amygdala and ACC are functionally connected during emotion regulation, fear, and during resting state as well as structurally connected by projections from the amygdala 
Another possible explanation is increased reliance on the cognitive override process in the vmPFC, as posited by the cognitive control theory of moral processing. However, this is not consistent with our ACC findings. In this model, cognitive control processes sub served by the ACC override emotional responses to promote rational (e.g., utilitarian) moral judgments. The increased engagement in the vmPFC may still be related to cognitive control abnormality. The vmPFC, specifically of prefrontal regions, plays a key role in integrating emotions into decision making during moral judgment. Rather than requiring more cognitive override of emotions in moral decision making, the increase in activity in this region may indicate that stimulant users have increased difficulty in integrating emotions into those moral judgments and thus have increased activity in the vmPFC based on task demands. Our findings, as previously discussed, suggest less overall processing in both emotional response and cognitive override processes rather than an increase in cognitive processes.
The caudal ACC has been isolated as a region predictive of recidivism in criminal offenders, above and beyond general substance use. Specifically, individuals with lower activity in this region during response inhibition were twice as likely to reoffend. The current results may offer a potential mechanism for this pattern; if cognitive control during moral processing is deficient, it may incline an individual to commit moral violations often ending in rearrest.
The vmPFC and amygdala abnormalities have implications for the continued development of moral standards and behaviors in individuals with stimulant use disorders. The amygdala and vmPFC work together through stimulus reinforcement learning to associate distress with moral transgressions. The vmPFC, a region involved in goal-oriented decision-making, has afferent connections to the amygdala, a region commonly implicated in fear conditioning. When communications between the vmPFC and amygdala are abnormal during socioemotional processing, as has been found here and in a previous study, affected individuals are not socialized to avoid committing moral transgressions. Amygdala dysfunction is also particularly relevant for drug use as the amygdala is thought to play a role in drug addiction in terms of abnormal neurotransmitter production.
Stimulant users often demonstrate deficiencies in cognitive control and corresponding neural hypoactivations; the vmPFC results do not necessarily provide evidence against this. Given that our chronic stimulant use participants display normal moral judgment in the task, task demands may have required that these individuals up-regulate their processes for integrating emotion into decision-making. Individuals with lesions to the vmPFC often have abnormal moral judgment and psychopathic behavior, since they cannot upregulate, as well as amygdala hyper reactivity to negative stimuli, possibly as a compensatory process on the other side of the amygdala-vmPFC system. It is important to note, however, that methamphetamine and cocaine appear to be contributing separately to abnormalities in these two connecting regions; although lesions to either region have been sufficient to impair moral processing, this distinction may reflect compounding effects of poly-stimulant use.
These results are consistent with previous research in stimulant users. Structural imaging studies of stimulant users have reported decreased volumes in the ACC, vmPFC and amygdala. Additionally, stimulant use is related to reward based decision-making abnormalities similar to patients with vmPFC lesions. No amygdala abnormalities were observed in a study of in-treatment cocaine users in moral compared to neutral dilemma judgments. This latter study included 10 cocaine users who were compared to a community control sample, and thus may have been underpowered to reveal group differences in brain responses; criminal cocaine users may also differ from community users (e.g., in severity, comorbidities, or length of use), which could explain discrepant results.
Our participants were chronic stimulant users in a semi-controlled environment. This means their access to drugs, although not non-existent, significantly more limited than in the community. We do not anticipate that the results would be substantively different if our participants were using in the community, given the literature finding that voluntarily abstinent stimulant users still have indications of structural and functional brain abnormalities. Moreover, by investigating stimulant users who were largely abstinent, our results were not confounded by the acute effects of heavy substance use. However, these results may not generalize to individuals actively or inactively using substances at a dependence level; a replication study in active stimulant users is needed to verify the generalizability of our findings to the stimulant using community as a whole. It is also important to note that the results of this study cannot be used to make strong causal claims regarding the influence of stimulant use on moral cognition. It is possible that individuals prone to regular stimulant use exhibited the observed abnormalities in moral processing before they began using stimulants. We did, however, see a change in vmPFC and ACC engagement as a function of increasing duration of stimulant use, a correlation that may indicate the impact of methamphetamine and cocaine use on the brain.
There were some limitations of this study. Many of our participants (both stimulant users and non-stimulant users) had comorbid substance abuse. Our stimulant and non-stimulant groups did differ on levels of non-stimulant substance use; although our results were substantively the same after covarying total years of non-stimulant substance abuse, there may be differences in poly-drug users above and beyond the duration of such use. It is worth noting that comorbid substance use is common in stimulant users. Thus, despite potential complicating effects of poly-drug use, our sample of stimulant users is highly representative of the stimulant using population. Another potential limitation was that our measure of duration did not account for the amount of the drugs used. Although previous research indicates that the duration measure of stimulant use can have meaningful correlates in the brain (i.e.,, 2013) this may not have adequately quantified severity of use.
In conclusion, regular stimulant users demonstrated abnormal neural activity during moral processing in fronto-limbic regions. Specifically, lifetime regular stimulant users had hypoactivation in the amygdala, while duration of stimulant use was related to decreased ACC engagement. These results correspond to the fronto-limbic moral processing system, suggesting that stimulant users may have impairment in regions in this system. This is the first study to suggest impairments in the neural systems of moral processing in both cocaine and methamphetamine users. Although further research into the connectivity of systems in stimulant use is needed, this provides promising initial understanding of fronto-limbic deficits in stimulant users.
The authors do not have any financial conflicts of interest.
Neuroprediction of future rearrest
Gene x Disease Interaction on Orbitofrontal Gray Matter in Cocaine Addiction
Location, location: using functional magnetic resonance imaging to pinpoint brain differences relevant to stimulant use
Amygdala–frontal connectivity during emotion regulation
Serial pathways from primate prefrontal cortex to autonomic areas may influence emotional expression
Age-related brain volume reductions in amphetamine and cocaine addicts and normal controls: implications for addiction research
The somatic marker hypothesis: A neural theory of economic decision
Decision-making deficits, linked to a dysfunctional ventromedial prefrontal cortex, revealed in alcohol and stimulant abusers

The amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex in morality and psychopathy
Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in abstinent cocaine abusers performing a decision-making task
Safety and efficacy of γ-vinyl GABA (GVG) for the treatment of methamphetamine and/or cocaine addiction
Parsing the neural correlates of moral cognition: ALE meta-analysis on morality, theory of mind, and empathy
Abnormal frontostriatal activity in recently abstinent cocaine users during implicit moral processing
Selective deficit in personal moral judgment following damage to ventromedial prefrontal cortex
Reduced fMRI activity predicts relapse in patients recovering from stimulant dependence
Substrates of neuropsychological functioning in stimulant dependence: a review of functional neuroimaging research
Separable neural components in the processing of black and white faces
Levels and correlates of polydrug use among heroin users and regular amphetamine users
Medial prefrontal gray matter volume reductions in users of amphetamine-type stimulants revealed by combined tract-based spatial statistics and voxel-based morphometry
Echoencephalographic findings in neonates assciiated with maternal cocaine and methamphetamine use: Incidence and clinical correlates
Abnormal structure of frontostriatal brain systems is associated with aspects of impulsivity and compulsivity in cocaine dependence
Abnormal Brain Structure Implicated in Stimulant Drug Addiction
Addiction and empathy: a preliminary analysis

Other Minds in the Brain - a Functional Imaging Study of Theory of Mind in Story Comprehension
Difficulties in emotion regulation and impulse control during cocaine abstinence
Selective Cocaine-Related Difficulties in Emotional Intelligence: Relationship to Stress and Impulse Control
Decreased gray matter concentration in the insular, orbitofrontal, cingulate, and temporal cortices of cocaine patients
What is the best similarity measure for motion correction in fMRI time series?
Cue-induced cocaine craving: neuroanatomical specificity for drug users and drug stimuli
The neural bases of cognitive conflict and control in moral judgment

The Fagerström test for nicotine dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire
Psychopathy and substance use
Social-cognitive difficulties in former users of methamphetamine
Cortical activation during delay discounting in abstinent methamphetamine dependent individuals
Contrasting trajectories of heroin, cocaine, and methamphetamine use
Prevalence, correlates, and comorbidity of nonmedical prescription drug use and drug use disorders in the United States: Results of the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions
Anatomical connectivity of the subgenual cingulate region targeted with deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression
Dissociating medial frontal and posterior cingulate activity during self-reflection
Failure to regulate: counterproductive recruitment of top-down prefrontal-subcortical circuitry in major depression
Impaired fear recognition in regular recreational cocaine users
Brain potentials implicate temporal lobe abnormalities in criminal psychopaths
The structural and functional connectivity of the amygdala: from normal emotion to pathological anxiety
Prefrontal grey-matter changes in short-term and long-term abstinent methamphetamine abusers
Impairments of facial emotion recognition and theory of mind in methamphetamine abusers
Alterations in cortical activity of male methamphetamine abusers performing an empathy task: fMRI study
Damage to the prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judgements
Risky decision making, prefrontal cortex, and mesocorticolimbic functional connectivity in methamphetamine dependence
Midbrain functional connectivity and ventral striatal dopamine D2-type receptors: link to impulsivity in methamphetamine users
The role of the striatopallidal and extended amygdala systems in drug addiction
Chronic methamphetamine abuse and corticostriatal deficits revealed by neuroimaging
Are there volumetric brain differences associated with the use of cocaine and amphetamine-type stimulants?
Decreased absolute amygdala volume in cocaine addicts
Precentral gyrus discrepancy in electronic versions of the Talairach atlas
An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets
Frontal cortical tissue composition in abstinent cocaine abusers: a magnetic resonance imaging study
Methods and software for fMRI analysis of clinical subjects
The fifth edition of the Addiction Severity Index
Misunderstanding analysis of covariance
The neural basis of human moral cognition
Frontoparietal cortical activity of methamphetamine-dependent and comparison subjects performing a delay discounting task
Gray-matter volume in methamphetamine dependence: cigarette smoking and changes with abstinence from methamphetamine
Trait impulsivity and prefrontal gray matter reductions in cocaine dependent individuals
A psychophysiological investigation of moral judgment after ventromedial prefrontal damage
Deficient fear recognition in regular cocaine users is not attributable to elevated impulsivity or conduct disorder prior to cocaine use
Ventromedial prefrontal cortex is critical for the regulation of amygdala activity in humans
Methamphetamine users show greater than normal age-related cortical gray matter loss

Cocaine users differ from normals on cognitive tasks which show poorer performance during drug abstinence
Behavioral and functional neuroimaging evidence for prefrontal dysfunction in methamphetamine-dependent subjects
Neural correlates of affect processing and aggression in methamphetamine dependence
Differences in cortical activity between methamphetamine-dependent and healthy individuals performing a facial affect matching task
Prevalence of DSM-IV substance abuse and dependence disorders among prison inmates
Impaired emotional empathy and related social network deficits in cocaine users

Sex differences in decreased limbic and cortical grey matter volume in cocaine dependence: a voxel-based morphometric study
Methamphetamine and cocaine users: differences in characteristics and treatment retention
Functional connectivity of the human amygdala using resting state fMRI
Development and preliminary validation of a Satz-Mogel short form of the WAIS-III in a sample of persons with substance abuse disorders


Neural basis of moral verdict and moral deliberation
The integration of negative affect, pain and cognitive control in the cingulate cortex
Cerebellar gray matter volume correlates with duration of cocaine use in cocaine-dependent subjects
Harming kin to save strangers: further evidence for abnormally utilitarian moral judgments after ventromedial prefrontal damage
Structural abnormalities in the brains of human subjects who use methamphetamine
Amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex are inversely coupled during regulation of negative affect and predict the diurnal pattern of cortisol secretion among older adults
Executive control deficits in substance-dependent individuals: a comparison of alcohol, cocaine, and methamphetamine and of men and women
Functional alteration in frontolimbic systems relevant to moral judgment in cocaine-dependent subjects
Functional heterogeneity in cingulate cortex: the anterior executive and posterior evaluative regions
Beyond social deviance: Substance use disorders and the dimensions of psychopathy

Mode of functional connectivity in amygdala pathways dissociates level of awareness for signals of fear
Regions of interests for the analyses looking at stimulant use analyses are represented using actual masks plotted as blobs on a canonical T1 template.
Characteristics of Lifetime Stimulant and Non-Stimulant Users Correlations Between Covariates in Lifetime Regular Stimulant Users
Covariate	Non-Regular Stimulant Users	Lifetime Regular Stimulant Users	 		 		Mean	SD	Mean	SD	 	Age	36.11	10.79	33.85	9.97	 	IQ	97.25	11.24	98.52	12.57	 	Years Regular Stim Use*	0.00	0.00	8.75	9.62	 	Years Regular Non-Stim Use*	11.88	11.59	23.91	14.47	 	PCL-R Total Score	20.80	7.75	22.01	6.95	 	Fagerstrom Symptoms	3.51	2.94	3.25	3.06	 	Age of First Cocaine Use	-	-	19.01	5.839	 	Age of First Meth Use	-	-	20.80	6.804	 	
Note: Asterisks in covariate column indicates significant between-group difference according to an independent samples t-test at a level of p < .001
Table of Group Averages and Regression Statistics for Behavioral Task Results
	Non-Regular Stimulant Users	Lifetime Regular Stimulant Users	Regression with Years of Stimulant Use	 		Mean	SD	Mean	SD	R2	 	Controversial Item Response Time	2608	553	2472	514	.000	 	Noncontroversial Item Response Time	2136	531	2037	458	.002	 	Number “Wrong” Button Presses	70.73	16.64	70.56	18.04	.004	 	Number “Not Wrong”Button Presses	72.29	16.40	70.90	18.03	.001	 	
Table of ROI Analysis Results for Group Comparison Controversial > Noncontroversial
	Lifetime Stimulant Users > Non- Stimulant Users	Lifetime Cocaine Users Non-Cocaine Users >	Lifetime Methamphetamine Users > Non-Methamphetamine Users	 	ROI	x	y	z	k	T	x		Y	z	K	T	x	y	z	k	T	 	Right Amygdala	30	−3	−27	51	−3.13*	30	−3	−27		49	−2.80†	21	3	−21	63	−2.88*	 	Anterior Cingulate Cortex	N.S.	N.S.	N.S.	 	Posterior Cingulate Cortex	N.S.	N.S.	N.S.	 	Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex	N.S.	N.S.	N.S.	 	
Notes:. Results reported covarying for years of non-stimulant and alcohol use. Significance indicated for all tests as follows:
p <.10,
p < .05,
Family-Wise Error (FWE) corrected. N.S. indicates that no clusters were found to survive small volume correction at a trend level or higher.
Table of ROI Analysis Results for Duration in Controversial > Noncontroversial
	Lifetime Stimulant Users		Lifetime Cocaine Users	Lifetime Methamphetamine Users	 	ROI	x	y	z	k	T	x	Y	z	K	T	x	y	z	k	T	 	Right Amygdala	N.S.	N.S.	N.S.	 	Anterior Cingulate Cortex	−15	21	27	29	−3.68*	−15	18	27	24	−3.53	N.S.	 	Posterior Cingulate Cortex	N.S.	N.S.	N.S.	 	Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex	12	48	6	51	3.48†	N.S.	6	63	15	72	3.69*	 	
Notes:. Results reported covarying for years of non-stimulant and alcohol use. Significance indicated for all tests as follows:
p <.10,
p < .05,
Family-Wise Error (FWE) corrected. N.S. indicates that no clusters were found to survive small volume correction at a trend level or higher.
