Dopamine-related disruption of functional topography of striatal connections in unmedicated patients with schizophrenia
Importance
Despite the well-established role of striatal dopamine in psychosis, current views generally agree that cortical dysfunction is likely necessary for the emergence of psychotic symptoms. The topographical organization of striatal-cortical connections is central to gating and integration of higher-order information, so a disruption of such topography via dysregulated dopamine could lead to cortical dysfunction in schizophrenia. However, this hypothesis remains to be tested using multivariate methods ascertaining the global pattern of striatal connectivity and without the confounding effects of anti-dopaminergic medication.
Objective
To determine whether the pattern of brain connectivity across striatal subregions is abnormal in unmedicated patients with schizophrenia, and whether this abnormality relates to psychotic symptoms and extrastriatal dopaminergic transmission.
Design and Participants
In this multimodal, case-control study, we obtained resting-state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data in 18 unmedicated patients with schizophrenia and 24 matched healthy controls. A subset of these (12 and 17, respectively) underwent Positron Emission Tomographic (PET) imaging with the dopamine D2-receptor radiotracer [11C]FLB457, before and after amphetamine. Data were acquired between June 16, 2011, and February 25, 2014.
Main Outcomes
(1) Group differences in the striatal connectivity pattern (assessed via multivariable logistic regression) across striatal subregions, and the relationship between the multivariate striatal connectivity pattern (2) with extrastriatal baseline D2-receptor binding potential and its change following amphetamine (BPND and ΔBPND), and (3) with severity of positive symptoms evaluated with the PANSS scale.
Results
Patients exhibited an abnormal pattern of striatal connectivity, which included abnormal caudate connections with a distributed set of associative cortex regions (p=0.0036). In patients, more deviation from the multivariate pattern of striatal connectivity found in controls correlated specifically with more severe positive symptoms (p=0.0021). Striatal connectivity also correlated with baseline BPND across cortical and extrastriatal subcortical regions (p=0.0116, Bonferroni-corrected) but not with ΔBPND.
Conclusions and Relevance
Using a multimodal, circuit-level interrogation of striatal-cortical connections, we provide a first demonstration that the functional topography of these connections is globally disrupted in unmedicated patients with schizophrenia. These findings suggest that striatal-cortical dysconnectivity may underlie the effects of dopamine dysregulation on the pathophysiology of psychotic symptoms.
INTRODUCTION
The striatum, in particular the associative striatum, is a central site of pathology in schizophrenia. Excessive dopamine in the associative striatum is an established finding in unmedicated patients with schizophrenia, in whom capacity for amphetamine-induced dopamine release correlates with worsening of psychotic symptoms. Such striatal excess of dopamine is thought to mediate its effects on cognition via basal-ganglia-thalamo-cortical (BGTC) circuits, which normally modulate cortical function by gating incoming information to the cortex. A topographical organization within BGTC circuits is thus crucial for anatomically selective gating of information to relevant cortical targets, and its disruption could produce various symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia.
In health, cortical inputs to the striatum are topographically organized in semi-parallel loops. In addition, ‘hotspot’ territories of converging inputs exist in the associative striatum which may be necessary to integrate disparate sources of reward and cognitive information. In schizophrenia, although the pairwise connectivity of specific striatal subregions with other brain regions has been assessed to some extent with univariate fMRI analyses, it is largely unknown whether such functional topography of striatal connections as a whole (i.e., the global pattern of connections across striatal subregions rather than connection strengths between specific pairs of striatal subregions and extrastriatal regions) is disrupted.
A key modulator of synaptic connectivity and plasticity in the striatum is dopamine. Indeed, a fundamental role of dopamine in learning depends on its ability to modulate synaptic plasticity, and thus the functional efficacy of neuronal connections at striatal synapses and elsewhere. Therefore, excessive dopamine transmission in the associative striatum could disrupt the organization of striatal-cortical connections, ultimately leading to aberrant information processing and psychosis. Disrupted connectivity could be further compounded by a deficit in extrastriatal dopamine, as recently demonstrated in schizophrenia. At the same time, the established effects of dopamine on striatal connectivity in health suggest that antipsychotic drugs may critically mask underlying abnormalities in striatal connectivity in medicated patients. As this confound may affect most fMRI connectivity studies in schizophrenia, conducted in medicated patients, it is therefore imperative to examine this question in unmedicated patients.
Here, we investigated the pattern of resting-state functional connectivity across subregions of the striatum in unmedicated patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls using a multivariate approach. Our main aims were to test (1) whether the functional topography of striatal connections is altered in schizophrenia, and whether such abnormalities correlate with (2) severity of psychotic symptoms and with (3) amphetamine-induced dopamine release and D2 receptor (D2R) density.
METHODS
Participants
Unmedicated patients with schizophrenia (n=19) and healthy controls (n=24) were recruited at New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) and through advertisements. All participants provided written informed consent as approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the NYSPI and Yale University. Inclusion criteria for healthy controls were: absence of (1) any DSM-IV Axis-I diagnosis and of (2) psychotic illness in first-degree relatives. Inclusion criteria for patients were: (1) lifetime DSM-IV diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizoaffective or schizophreniform disorder (based on the Diagnostic Interview for Genetic Studies and consensus diagnosis); (2) no antipsychotics for 3 weeks before study enrollment; (3) no violent behavior. Common exclusion criteria were significant medical illnesses, misuse of substances other than nicotine, positive urine drug screen, pregnancy and nursing. PET and task-based fMRI data on 28 of the 42 subjects was previously published.
Symptom severity was assessed with the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS), and the Scale for Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS). The Hollingshead scale, the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory and the MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery were also obtained.
Resting-state fMRI data acquisition
Participants completed 2 runs of 165 volumes each on a Philips 1.5T scanner. They were instructed to relax and keep their eyes open. Participants were spoken to before and after each sequence to ensure wakefulness. Whole-brain functional echo-planar images were obtained using an 8-channel coil (3-mm isotropic voxels; eMethods).
fMRI preprocessing
Preprocessing followed standard procedures in SPM8 and ‘scrubbing’ procedures for resting-state fMRI (eMethods). ‘Scrubbing’ cutoffs were established based on a larger dataset for two indices of motion-related data quality reflecting the rate of change in brain-wide signal (DVARS) and total instantaneous framewise displacement (FD), respectively. One patient was excluded due to excessive motion. Temporal band-pass filtering, spatial smoothing, and voxelwise z-scoring of time series were applied.
Region-of-interest (ROI) definition
Striatal and extrastriatal ROIs were manually drawn on individual T1-weighted scans as defined previously. The striatum was divided into 5 subregions: (1) ventral striatum, (2) anterior (pre-commissural) caudate, (3) posterior (post-commissural) caudate, (4) anterior putamen, and (5) posterior putamen. Unsmoothed fMRI data from each subregion was averaged across the containing voxels (collapsing across hemispheres; eMethods) and z-scored to construct seed timeseries. Extracting the first eigenvariate instead of the mean yielded almost identical results, indicating high functional homogeneity within subregions. Ipsilateral and contralateral connectivity were highly consistent within subregions (Supplement).
fMRI data analysis
Subject-level analyses consisted of a Generalized Linear Model (GLM) in SPM8 including the following regressors: (1–5) spatially averaged timeseries for each of the 5 striatal subregions (seeds), (6–7) timeseries for white-matter and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) regions-of-no-interest (eMethods), (8–19) six head motion (realignment) parameters and their first derivatives (all band-pass filtered), and (20–21) run and global intercepts. One dummy variable was additionally included to censor each artifactual set of adjacent volumes exceeding either the DVARS or FD cutoffs. The resulting regression coefficient (beta) maps for each striatal subregion, representing connection strengths for each brain voxel with one striatal subregion while controlling for the other four (and the nuisance variables), were used subsequently.
Multivariate fMRI analyses
Our primary goal was to test whether the overall pattern of striatal connectivity predicted group membership using logistic regression. We used a multivariate approach rather than univariate analyses because the latter can only test connectivity between individual seeds and target regions but not the overall (multivariate) pattern of connectivity across seeds. Our purpose in using logistic regression, however, was not as a diagnostic classifier, but rather as a test of multivariate differences in connectivity. Exploratory analyses (Supplement) used a multivariate recursive-feature-elimination support-vector-machine (RFE-SVM) classifier for the former purpose.
First, whole-brain connectivity beta maps for each striatal subregion were parcellated into Brodmann areas (BAs) and subcortical nuclei using the Tailarach Daemon atlas in the WFU PickAtlas toolbox (henceforth referred to as target regions), after excluding striatal voxels. Second, a data-reduction step retained only target regions exhibiting significant connectivity with any of the striatal subregions (p≤0.005, uncorrected, in ≥20% of the voxels) in either group; 29 regions met these criteria (for individual striatal subregions 1–5 the number of target regions to meet criteria were 0, 24, 2, 5, and 4, respectively). Although these selection criteria were unbiased towards any subregion, they yielded more target regions for the anterior caudate given its stronger widespread connectivity.
Next, logistic regression was used to predict group membership based on connection strengths for striatal-target pairs (i.e., individual mean connectivity betas for each target region by striatal subregion). Because including all pairs each as a predictor variable would result in an underdetermined model, we used model building with step-forward selection to progressively include sets of predictor variables, with each of five possible sets consisting of all connectivity betas for target regions significantly associated with a given striatal subregion. First, models consisting of predictors from one set at a time were analyzed, and the set resulting in the lowest p-value was retained. Additional sets of variables were retained in the model if they significantly improved the model fit (p<0.05, likelihood-ratio test). The likelihood-ratio test for the final model was our a priori test of group differences in connectivity patterns (other p-values were only used for data-reduction and model-building steps). Once the final model was determined, the subject-wise predicted log odds of belonging to the healthy group based on the multivariate connectivity pattern was used as a summary index of degree of abnormality in the striatal connectivity pattern for further correlational analyses with clinical and PET data (note that these analyses were unbiased as the ordering of the log odds across individuals was orthogonal to all clinical and PET data except for group membership, which was controlled for appropriately; eMethods).
These correlational analyses used parametric tests except when the data were not normally distributed (based on a Lilliefors test), in which case non-parametric tests were used. Spearman’s rank (partial) correlations were used to assess the relationship between connectivity and severity of positive symptoms within patients, based on the PANSS positive-subscale-total scores (PANSS-PT), while controlling for negative symptoms as measured by the PANSS negative-subscale-total scores (PANSS-NT). Robust multiple linear regression (iteratively-reweighted least squares with bisquare-weighting function) was used to assess the relationship between connectivity and PET data (baseline BPND or ΔBPND, see below) across all participants while controlling for group and nuisance variables. Spearman rank correlations were used for exploratory analyses of the MATRICS composite score. Effects surviving a p-value of 0.05 are reported. Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons was used when necessary. Finally, the number of artifactual volumes regressed out for each participant was also used as an fMRI-data-quality score.
PET preprocessing and data analysis
A detailed description of PET procedures and results was previously published. Participants underwent two PET scans with the D2 radiotracer [11C]FLB457 on an Siemens HR+ scanner at Yale University: a baseline scan and a second scan 3 h after oral administration of amphetamine (0.5 mg/kg). Arterial plasma was collected to form metabolite-corrected input functions. Kinetic modeling used a two-tissue compartment model that incorporated a set of shared parameter estimates across predefined ROIs. Binding potential (BPND) and its relative change from baseline following amphetamine (ΔBPND) were estimated in each ROI excluding the striatum – striatal BPND cannot be quantified with [11C]FLB457 due to its slow washout in this high D2R density region. Both BPND and ΔBPND values were highly correlated across regions (mean r~0.8). Thus, as a data-reduction step we performed principal component analyses (PCA) with varimax rotation, separately for BPND and ΔBPND, across regions. Horn’s parallel analyses yielded a 1-factor solution for baseline BPND (corresponding to D2R density across all regions) and a 1-factor solution for ΔBPND (corresponding to dopamine release across all regions). For correlational analyses, individual factor scores were calculated as the weighted sum of factor loadings by the PET measures (BPND or ΔBPND) across ROIs.
RESULTS
Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics
Groups were matched for sociodemographic characteristics, nicotine smoking, and head motion after scrubbing (Table 1). Clinical characteristics are also shown in Table 1.
Functional topography of striatal connections (multivariate fMRI analysis)
The pattern of connection strengths across striatal-target pairs differed numerically between the groups, particularly for the anterior caudate (Fig. 1). Statistically, the logistic-regression model that best explained group membership (χ2 (29)=53.55, p=0.0036, likelihood-ratio [omnibus] test) was one that included all connection pairs related to the anterior caudate (with 24 pairs) and posterior caudate (with 5 pairs; Fig. 1). Thus, the pattern of functional connections between the caudate and specific regions of the cortex and thalamus was abnormal in patients. Cortical regions individually contributing to this effect included prefrontal (BAs 8, 10, 44), sensory association (BAs 20, 22, 19, and 7), posterior cingulate (BA 23), and entorhinal (BA 28) cortices. The log odds of belonging to the healthy group did not relate to medication status or age (all p>0.19).
Alternative definitions of the relevant target regions yielded similar results (Supplement). Additional analyses suggested that, although connectivity patterns for each striatal subregion could separately predict group membership, that associated with posterior caudate was most discriminative (Supplement). Finally, an RFE-SVM classifier discriminated patients and controls above chance based on the global pattern of striatal connectivity (including pairs for all subregions except for the ventral striatum; eFigure 1).
Clinical correlations
Patients with a more abnormal (less control-like) striatal connectivity pattern (i.e., lower log odds of belonging to the healthy control group) had more severe positive symptoms (PANSS-PT: ρ=−0.76, p=0.0011; SAPS: ρ=−0.66, p=0.0076; Fig. 2A). This correlation was not observed with negative symptoms (PANSS-NT: ρ=−0.24, p=0.39; SANS: ρ=0.01, p=0.96; Fig. 2B). Furthermore, the correlation with PANSS-PT held after controlling for PANSS-NT and fMRI-data-quality scores (ρ=−0.77, p=0.0021). Alternative analyses cross-validated this finding (Supplement). PANSS-PT and PANSS-NT scores were not correlated among patients (ρ=0.31, p=0.26).
Correlations with [11C]FLB457 PET measures
We found that more control-like striatal connectivity patterns correlated with higher baseline BPND principal-component scores, even after adjusting for fMRI-data-quality scores and group (beta=0.27, t(25)=3.01, p=0.0058, p=0.0116 Bonferroni-corrected; Fig. 2C), but no interaction of connectivity-pattern-by-group or significant relationships with ΔBPND. Excluding a potentially influential outlier did not alter this result (p=0.002). This effect was also apparent within patients only (p=0.0051) and was corroborated by alternative analyses and across individual regions (Supplement). Age was unrelated to the PET measures (all p>0.1). Baseline BPND principal-component scores were similar in both groups (t(27)=0.76, p=0.45).
Exploratory correlations with neurocognitive measures
Exploratory analyses showed a correlation between abnormal striatal connectivity patterns and worse MATRICS composite scores in patients (ρ=0.6809, p=0.0302) but not in controls.
Exploratory analyses of univariate voxelwise functional connectivity and global-brain-connectivity (GBC)
A test of the group-by-striatal-subregion interaction did not yield significant results, nor did the group effects for individual subregions (Supplement). In healthy controls, but not in patients, the anterior caudate showed significantly stronger connectivity than any of the other subregions to prefrontal, parietal, and temporal association cortices, as well as to the thalamus (all p<0.05, FDR-corrected; Fig. 3). However, the group difference was not significant. Finally, the anterior caudate had higher GBC (eMethods) or weighted degree centrality, a graph-theoretic index of “hubness”, than the other striatal subregions (all p<0.0162; Fig. 4). GBC of the anterior caudate was numerically but not significantly reduced in patients (Supplement).
DISCUSSION
Our results show that the normal functional topography of striatal connections, particularly but not solely of caudate connections, is disrupted in schizophrenia. As our sample was comprised exclusively of unmedicated patients, this disruption is unlikely due to antipsychotic medication and may instead be relevant to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Further supporting this interpretation, abnormal striatal connectivity correlated with clinical severity, specifically with severity of positive symptoms but not negative symptoms. Finally, abnormal connectivity also correlated with lower density of D2Rs across cortical and extrastriatal subcortical brain regions within the same individuals.
Our results converge in suggesting that the healthy caudate, in particular the anterior caudate, is a connectivity hub. In health, connectivity of the anterior caudate with an extended set of higher-order associative regions was stronger than that of other striatal subregions. In contrast, this primacy of the anterior caudate was not as apparent in patients. The pattern observed in health is consistent with previous work showing that the anterior caudate receives overlapping projections from various regions in fronto-parietal cortices. This previous work suggests that in addition to the semi-segregated loops supporting specialization, convergence zones within the anterior caudate may serve as information-processing hubs relevant for integration.
Given this, our results of abnormal striatal connectivity patterns in schizophrenia, and its relationship to positive symptoms, may suggest that a disruption affecting, among other regions, a striatal hub for information multiplexing is involved in psychosis, in line with dysconnectivity hypotheses. Our findings may be consistent with findings of disrupted hemispheric specialization and decreased global connectivity of the caudate as well as those demonstrating deficient striato-cortical connectivity in schizophrenia and altered caudate-cortical connectivity in subjects at high-risk for psychosis. Although dysfunction and dysconnectivity of the (ventral) striatum may relate to negative symptoms, we failed to find such a relationship, although more work in this direction is warranted. Together with findings highlighting the role of striatal dopamine dysregulation in schizophrenia, our results suggest that disruptions of striatal circuitry may plausibly mediate the deleterious effects of dopamine dysregulation on cortical processes involved in perception and cognition.
Our PET results indeed suggest that abnormal striatal connectivity in schizophrenia may depend on dopamine. We failed to detect a relationship between dysconnectivity and amphetamine-induced dopamine release, possibly due to the limited range of extrastriatal release in patients, who showed a marked deficit in release with preserved D2R levels. We did, however, observe more abnormal connectivity associated with lower baseline density of D2R across extrastriatal regions. Prefrontal dopamine exerts a bidirectional modulation of network activity by tuning recurrent network excitation, where D2 stimulation reduces inhibitory post-synaptic currents. Therefore, decreased D2Rs could potentially explain aberrant network activity propagating through BGTC circuits and leading to disruptions in activity-dependent plasticity consistent with the observed pattern of dysconnectivity in patients. Furthermore, the generalized deficit in extrastriatal dopamine release in patients is likely to compound lower D2R expression, further dampening D2 function in those patients with more manifest dysconnectivity. Finally, the observed relationships between D2R, deficient striatal connectivity, and psychosis are consistent with a study showing that improvement of psychosis following D2R-blocking medication correlated with strengthened caudate-prefrontal connectivity.
Our study has several limitations. Our limited sample size may have increased the risk of false negatives and effect-size inflation. Our choice of radiotracer precluded measures of striatal dopamine and of D1R, which would help better understand the relationship between dopamine and dysconnectivity. Nonetheless, this is to our knowledge the first multimodal study in schizophrenia combining molecular imaging and a systems-level, fMRI connectivity approach. Exploratory univariate analyses failed to find a group difference in contrast to our primary multivariate analysis. However, this could suggest that multivariate measures provide a more powerful way to interrogate circuit pathology. Finally, a general limitation of resting-state studies is the lack of control over transient mental states experienced during data collection. Although we did not debrief participants after scanning, psychotic symptoms experienced in the scanner tend to correlate highly with pre-scanning severity scores. Thus, our findings related to psychosis severity may partly reflect psychopathological states experienced in the scanner.
Conclusions
Unmedicated patients with schizophrenia display abnormalities in the functional topography of striatal connections. These abnormalities correlate specifically with more severe psychotic symptoms and lower density of extrastriatal D2R, suggesting the relevance of this neural phenotype to the pathophysiology of psychosis and potentially informing new therapeutic targets at the intersection between molecules and neural systems. Our results further suggest that the striatum contains connectivity hubs relevant for cognitive integration whose disruption may impair higher-order cortical processes involved in psychosis.
Supplementary Material
The nature of dopamine dysfunction in schizophrenia and what this means for treatment
Increased dopamine transmission in schizophrenia: relationship to illness phases
Striatal dopamine release in schizophrenia comorbid with substance dependence
The current status of the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia
Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex
Cognitive functions and corticostriatal circuits: insights from Huntington’s disease
The primate basal ganglia: parallel and integrative networks
Estimates of projection overlap and zones of convergence within frontal-striatal circuits
Reward-related cortical inputs define a large striatal region in primates that interface with associative cortical connections, providing a substrate for incentive-based learning
Dopamine and synaptic plasticity in dorsal striatal circuits controlling action selection
Dopaminergic control of synaptic plasticity in the dorsal striatum
In vivo activity-dependent plasticity at cortico-striatal connections: evidence for physiological long-term potentiation
Dynamic dopamine modulation in the basal ganglia: a neurocomputational account of cognitive deficits in medicated and nonmedicated Parkinsonism
Dopamine receptor activation is required for corticostriatal spike-timing-dependent plasticity
Deficits in prefrontal cortical and extrastriatal dopamine release in schizophrenia: a positron emission tomographic functional magnetic resonance imaging study
Dopamine-dependent architecture of cortico-subcortical network connectivity
L-dopa modulates functional connectivity in striatal cognitive and motor networks: a double-blind placebo-controlled study
Diagnostic interview for genetic studies. Rationale, unique features, and training. NIMH Genetics Initiative



The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory
The MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery, part 1: test selection, reliability, and validity
Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion
Increased prefrontal cortical D(1) receptors in drug naive patients with schizophrenia: a PET study with [(1)(1)C]NNC112
Measurement of striatal and extrastriatal dopamine D-1 receptor binding potential with [C-11]NNC 112 in humans: Validation and reproducibility
Functional connectivity of human striatum: a resting state FMRI study
Automated Talairach atlas labels for functional brain mapping
An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets
A Rationale and Test for the Number of Factors in Factor Analysis
Converging structural and functional connectivity of orbitofrontal, dorsolateral prefrontal, and posterior parietal cortex in the human striatum
The neural network underlying incentive-based learning: implications for interpreting circuit disruptions in psychiatric disorders
Dysconnection in schizophrenia: from abnormal synaptic plasticity to failures of self-monitoring
Abnormalities in hemispheric specialization of caudate nucleus connectivity in schizophrenia
Resting-state fMRI connectivity impairment in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Task-related fronto-striatal functional connectivity during working memory performance in schizophrenia
Functional dysconnectivity of corticostriatal circuitry as a risk phenotype for psychosis
Functional connectivity and grey matter volume of the striatum in schizophrenia
Functional dysconnectivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in first-episode schizophrenia using resting-state fMRI
Altered striatal functional connectivity in subjects with an at-risk mental state for psychosis
Ventral Striatal Activation During Reward Processing in Psychosis: A Neurofunctional Meta-Analysis
Negative symptoms in schizophrenia are associated with aberrant striato-cortical connectivity in a rewarded perceptual decision-making task
Differential brain glucose metabolic patterns in antipsychotic-naive first-episode schizophrenia with and without auditory verbal hallucinations
Deficits in predictive coding underlie hallucinations in schizophrenia
Cortical activations during auditory verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia: a coordinate-based meta-analysis
Dopamine-mediated stabilization of delay-period activity in a network model of prefrontal cortex
Mechanisms underlying differential D1 versus D2 dopamine receptor regulation of inhibition in prefrontal cortex
Antipsychotic treatment and functional connectivity of the striatum in first-episode schizophrenia
Differences in multivariate pattern of striatal connections between unmedicated patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls
Top panel: coronal views of striatal subregion seeds; voxels identified as part of each subregion in at least half of the subjects are overlaid on a group-averaged T1-weighted image. Middle panels: patterns of striatal connectivity are shown in controls (top) and patients (bottom) as bar plots of connectivity strength (group mean beta ± S.E.M.) by striatal subregion (using the same color scheme as in the top panel) and target region on the X axis (from left to right, cortical Brodmann areas [BA] followed by hippocampus, globus pallidus, and thalamic nuclei). Bottom panel: betas weights (log Odds Ratio or log OR) corresponding to each of the predictor variables or regressors included in the final logistic-regression model predicting group membership (controls=1, patients=0); this final (most parsimonious) model included only striatal-target pairs related to the anterior caudate (blue) and posterior caudate (fuchsia; see eMethods). Asterisks denote logistic-regression beta estimates significantly different than zero (single asterisks denote p<0.05; double asterisks denote p<0.01; post-hoc tests of individual beta estimates adjusted their degrees of freedom based on the total number of predictor variables, thus controlling for multiple comparisons). GP: globus pallidus; VPL: ventral posterior lateral nucleus; VPM : ventral posterior medial; MD: mediodorsal; VL: ventrolateral; VA: ventral anterior.
Correlations of striatal connectivity pattern with symptom severity and D2 receptor density measured with [11C]FLB457 PET
Scatterplots show relationships between connectivity pattern (log odds of belonging to the healthy group based on the multivariate pattern of striatal connectivity) and (A) severity of positive symptoms based on the PANSS-PT scores in patients, (B) severity of negative symptoms based on the PANSS-NT scores in patients, and (C) baseline BPND (corresponding to the first principal component score), adjusted by group and fMRI-data-quality score, across all subjects (note that group adjustment shifts the group means such that the connectivity pattern appears to overlap between the groups along the X axis). Values in A and B are ranked given that the appropriate corresponding tests are non-parametric.
Voxelwise connectivity of striatal subregions in patients and healthy controls
Top panel: regions showing significant connectivity with each of the 5 striatal subregions (each in a different color) are depicted in controls (left) and patients (right) and overlaid onto an inflated brain surface (using the PALS-B12 atlas in Caret 5.65). Connectivity maps show effects corresponding to p<0.05, FDR-corrected. Bottom panel: t maps show regions with significantly stronger connectivity to the anterior caudate than to the other 4 striatal subregions in warm colors in controls (left) and patients (right).
Global brain connectivity of striatal subregions in patients and healthy controls
Absolute beta values averaged across all extrastriatal brain voxels (± S.E.M.) are plotted by striatal subregion and group.
Sociodemographic, clinical, and other relevant characteristics of healthy controls and patients with schizophrenia
Means ± S.E.M. are presented for continuous variables. P-values correspond to two-sample t-tests for continuous variables and χ2 tests for categorical variables. Mean framewise displacement is given for scrubbed fMRI frames. All 18 patients met DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia (versus other disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum). C: Caucasian; AA: African-American; Hisp: Hispanic; As: Asian. See eTable 1 relevant information for the subset of participants with fMRI and PET data. See eTable 2 for PET scanning parameters and additional data.
Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics	Controls (n=24)	Patients (n=18)	p-value	 	Age (years)	33.7 ± 8.8	35.6 ± 11.8	0.54	 	Sex (female/male)	14/10	9/9	0.59	 	Ethnicity (C/AA/Hisp/As/mixed)	6/8/5/3/2	1/9/4/1/2	0.28	 	Parental SES	39.0 ± 13.9	45.6 ± 11.7	0.13	 	Handedness (right/left)	23/1	16/2	0.39	 	Nicotine smoking (no/yes)	21/3	13/5	0.21	 	PANSS positive symptoms total [range, 7–49]	7.0 ± 0.0 [7–8]	13.6 ± 6.4 [9–23]	<0.001	 	PANSS negative symptoms total [range, 7–49]	8.8 ± 1.4 [7–16]	15.1 ± 5.8 [7–25]	<0.001	 	PANSS general symptoms total [range, 16–112]	17.0 ± 1.4 [16–25]	29.1 ± 7.8 [18–53]	<0.001	 	MATRICS (MCBB) composite T scores	46.3 ± 2.5	33.3 ± 3.7	0.02	 	Medication status (drug-naïve/drug-free)	-	6/12		 	Onset psychotic symptoms (years)	-	16.4 ± 5.2		 	Duration of psychotic illness (years)	-	18.7 ± 12.2		 	Censored data (number of ‘scrubbed’ volumes)	64.3 ± 13.5	99.5 ± 21.7	0.16	 	Framewise displacement after censoring (FD)	0.29 ± 0.0	0.30 ± 0.0	0.76	 	Interval between MRI and PET scans (days)	20.5 ± 24.8	7.2 ± 2.6	0.67	 	
