Regional and source-based patterns of [11C]-(+)-PHNO binding potential reveal concurrent alterations in dopamine D2 and D3 receptor availability in cocaine-use disorder
Dopamine type 2 and type 3 receptors (D2R/D3R) appear critical to addictive disorders. Cocaine-use disorder (CUD) is associated with lower D2R availability and greater D3R availability in regions primarily expressing D2R or D3R concentrations, respectively. However, these CUD-related alterations in D2R and D3R have not been concurrently detected using available dopaminergic radioligands. Furthermore, receptor availability in regions of mixed D2R/D3R concentration in CUD remains unclear. The current study aimed to extend investigations of CUD-related alterations in D2R and D3R availability using regional and source-based analyses of [11C]-(+)-PHNO positron emission tomography (PET) of 26 individuals with CUD and 26 matched healthy comparison (HC) participants. Regional analysis detected greater binding potential (BPND) in CUD in the midbrain, consistent with prior [11C]-(+)-PHNO research, and lower BPND in CUD in the dorsal striatum, consistent with research using non-selective D2R/D3R radiotracers. Exploratory independent component analysis (ICA) identified three sources of BPND (striatopallidal, pallidonigral, and mesoaccumbens sources) that represent systems of brain regions displaying coherent variation in receptor availability. The striatopallidal source was associated with estimates of regional D2R-related proportions of BPND (calculated using independent reports of [11C]-(+)-PHNO receptor binding fractions), was lower in intensity in CUD and negatively associated with years of cocaine use. By comparison, the pallidonigral source was associated with estimates of regional D3R distribution, was greater in intensity in CUD and positively associated with years of cocaine use. The current study extends previous D2R/D3R research in CUD, demonstrating both lower BPND in the D2R-rich dorsal striatum and greater BPND in the D3R-rich midbrain using a single radiotracer. In addition, exploratory ICA identified sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND that were correlated with regional estimates of D2R-related and D3R-related proportions of BPND, were consistent with regional differences in CUD, and suggest receptor alterations in CUD may also be present in regions of mixed D2R/D3R concentration.
1. Introduction
Individuals with cocaine-use disorder (CUD) exhibit alterations in subcortical dopamine including alterations in receptor availability, blunted dopamine release and reduced dopamine transport mechanisms. However, dopaminergic pharmacotherapies for stimulant-related addictions have displayed limited efficacy to date (see), thus a greater understanding of dopamine-related alterations in CUD may improve targeted interventions for addictions. Alterations in dopamine type-2 and type-3 receptors (D2R/D3R) are associated with CUD and other substance-use disorders, suggesting related neurobiological mechanisms that may hold potential as targets in treating addictions. Specifically, D2Rs and D3Rs are implicated in the habitual and compulsive behaviors associated with the persistence of chronic drug use and relapse. Animal models demonstrate functional dissociation of D2R and D3R systems, suggesting these dopamine receptor subtypes may provide distinct contributions to addictive processes.
Research using dopamine-antagonist radioligands with equal affinities for D2R and D3Rs (e.g., [11C]raclopride) indicate lower receptor availability in D2R-rich striatal regions of individuals with CUD. By comparison, research using the D3R-preferring dopamine-agonist radioligand [11C]-(+)-PHNO in CUD and stimulant addiction indicate increased receptor availability in the D3R-rich midbrain. These concurrently upregulated and downregulated dopamine systems in CUD may undermine dopaminergic therapies for cocaine addiction. Adding to this complexity, D2R and D3R are both expressed in structures central to addiction (e.g., midbrain, ventral striatum, pallidum), and assessing potential alterations of specific receptor subtypes in these regions is challenging.
Regional binding of [11C]-(+)-PHNO reflects local concentrations of both D2Rs and D3Rs, allowing for simultaneous imaging of D2R/D3R not possible using other D2-like receptor radioligands. To date however, [11C]-(+)-PHNO research of CUD has not replicated findings of lower receptor availability in the D2R-rich dorsal striatum, or detected alterations in mixed-D2R/D3R regions. However, these results of non-altered D2R-like availability in the striatum in CUD are consistent with research using alternative dopamine-agonist radioligands with equal affinities for D2R/D3R (e.g., [11C]NPA). The current study aimed to further examine D2R and D3R alterations in the midbrain, striatum and other subcortical structures (e.g., globus pallidus, ventral pallidum and hypothalamus) in CUD using [11C]-(+)-PHNO positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. Investigation of regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND was conducted on individuals with CUD and matched healthy comparison (HC) participants.
In addition, exploratory spatial independent component analysis (ICA) was performed on [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND data to examine D2R and D3R using a source-based approach. ICA is a data-driven computational procedure that decomposes or ‘un-mixes’ a measured signal into its maximal spatially independent ‘sources’. While [11C]-(+)-PHNO exhibits an estimated 20- to 50-fold selectivity in vivo for D3Rs relative to D2Rs, local BPND reflects a weighted sum of D2R/D3R concentrations. That is, [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND primarily reflects D3R availability in D3-rich regions (e.g., substantia nigra), D2R availability in D2-rich regions (e.g., dorsal striatum), and an aggregate of D2R and D3R availability in mixed D2R/D3R regions (e.g. ventral striatum). This unique mixed-signal nature of [11C]-(+)-PHNO strongly motivates the utility of source-based analyses like ICA to un-mix the D2R and D3R components of BPND and examine distinct sources of receptor availability.
We hypothesized that CUD-related reductions in D2R availability in the dorsal striatum would be detectable using [11C]-(+)-PHNO in a large sample, and that CUD-related increases in D3R availability in the midbrain would be confirmed. We also hypothesized that the exploratory ICA would identify sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND consistent with estimates of regional proportions of D2R-related and D3R-related BPND, with mixed-D2R/D3R regions incorporated into multiple sources. Consistent with research demonstrating regional differences in D2R and D3R in CUD, we hypothesized that individuals with CUD would exhibit increased intensity of sources that include D3-rich regions and reduced intensity of sources that include D2-rich regions. Finally, we examined relationships between regional BPND and source intensities with duration of cocaine use.
2. Methods and Materials
2.1. Participants
Participants were 26 non-treatment seeking individuals with CUD and 26 age- and gender-matched HC participants, most of whom (22 CUD and 21 HC) were included in previous reports (Table 1). Physical exams with medical history, routine laboratory studies, pregnancy tests and electrocardiograms (ECGs) were performed to assess medical health eligibility criteria. Urine toxicology screening for a range of drugs (including cocaine, amphetamines, marijuana, opiates, benzodiazepines, barbiturates) were performed to confirm cocaine-use status in CUD participants and the absence of other recent drug use in both CUD and HC participants. Participants were assessed for DSM-IV diagnoses using clinical interviews (SCID; MINI). Participants meeting criteria for cocaine dependence (i.e., presenting with 3 or more criteria) were included in the CUD sample. Exclusion criteria included the presence or history of a general medical illness or psychotic disorder, pregnancy or breast feeding, or any condition that would interfere with the ability to participate in PET or MRI protocols (e.g., claustrophobia, metallic implants). All study procedures were approved by the Yale Human Investigation, Yale University Radiation Safety, Yale-New Haven Hospital Radioactive Drug Research, and Yale MRI Safety Committees, and participants provided written informed consent.
2.2. Radiochemistry and image acquisition
[11C]-(+)-PHNO was prepared as previously described. Radioactive dose, specific activity and injected mass for CUD and HC groups are listed in Table 1. PET imaging was performed on a Siemens high-resolution research tomograph (HRRT; Siemens/CTI, Knoxville, TN, USA). A transmission scan was obtained before the emission scan. PET scans (slices=207, slice separation=1.2mm, reconstructed image resolution ~3 mm) were acquired for 120 min at rest. Head motion was measured using an optical detector (Vicra, NDI Systems, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). MR images were collected on a Siemens 3T Trio system (Siemens Medical Solutions, Malvern, PA) using a magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence (repeat time (TR)/echo time (TE)=2530/3.34, flip angle=7°, in-plane resolution=0.98×0.98 mm, matrix=256×256, slice thickness=1mm, slices=176).
2.3. Image processing
Dynamic PET data (frame timing: 6×30s; 3×60s; 2×120s; 22×300s) were reconstructed with corrections (attenuation, normalization, scatter, randoms, deadtime and motion) using the MOLAR algorithm. Parametric images of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND were computed using a simplified reference tissue model (SRTM2) with the cerebellum as reference. Registration of individual images into MNI152 space was performed using SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK). A summed [11C]-(+)-PHNO uptake (0–10 min post-injection) image was created from the motion-corrected PET data and rigid-body registered to the subject's MR image. Nonlinear registration of the MR image to MNI152 space was determined using optimized unified segmentation. The combined rigid-body and nonlinear registrations were applied to the parametric BPND, and smoothed with a 4mm FWHM Gaussian kernel.
2.4. Analyses of regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND
Seven regions of interest (ROIs) were examined: dorsal caudate (DCA), dorsal putamen (DPU), globus pallidus (GP), hypothalamus (HY), substantia nigra (SN), ventral pallidum (VP), and ventral striatum (VS). ROIs were defined using previously described guidelines. DCA, DPU and VS ROIs were obtained from FSL (Oxford Centre for Functional MRI of the Brain, Oxford, UK). GP, HY, and VP ROIs were manually drawn on the ICBM-MNI52 template (Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, Canada). The SN ROI was manually defined on a group-average parametric [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND image from an independent sample. Regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND was determined from the individual smoothed parametric BPND images in standard space. ROI volumes were calculated by inverse transformation of template regions into individual native space. A confirmatory whole-brain, between-group analysis was performed on BPND images using a two-sample t-test in SPM12 with a relative threshold mask (0.8; displayed in Figure 1). Due to the relatively low BPND signal (less than 0.5) in the thalamic and amygdala regions included in previous reports, substantial portions of these structures did not survive threshold masking and thus were excluded from ROI analyses. Group differences were explored at an uncorrected significance level of p<0.005, and cluster extent (k) >20 contiguous voxels.
2.5. Independent component analysis (ICA)
Exploratory ICA was performed on parametric images of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND using the source-based morphometry (SBM) module of the Group ICA of fMRI Toolbox (GIFT v2.0e; http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift). Using higher order statistics, ICA identifies maximally independent vectors that comprise an unknown linear mixture (A) of mostly non-Gaussian sources (s) that generate a random variable (x). Given x = As, ICA solves for y =Wx, or the estimated un-mixing matrix (W) of approximated source maps (y). Parametric images of all 52 participants were entered into the ICA to allow direct comparison of source loadings. The analysis was constrained to data within the relative threshold mask determined in the GLM analysis (described above), and with no prior information as to group membership. A modified minimum-description-length (MDL) criterion estimated the dimensionality of the dataset to consist of three sources which were extracted from the aggregate dataset using a neural-network algorithm designed to minimize mutual information of source outputs (InfoMax).
Output from the ICA included the spatial source maps (yM;M =1,2,3) and subject ICA-loading values (Ã; 1M,i;i = 1, …, 52), where Ã denotes the estimate of the unknown mixing matrix A (i.e. the inverse of ICA-derived un-mixing matrix W). Note that applications of ICA to biomedical images typically employ principal component analysis (PCA) for data reduction prior to ICA; thus, subject ICA-loadings also incorporate the PCA-reduction factor (R) and are more accurately characterized as (R × Ã), but for convenience, we use Ã to represent the final subject ICA-loading parameters. The subject ICA-loading values represent the source ‘intensity’ or relative strength to which each subject’s BPND data contained a given source. The spatial source maps were ‘intensity-scaled’ such that (yM × Ã) reflects the relative contribution of each source to the aggregate BPND signal, where ÃM,iis the average subject intensity for source M, and: where x̃ is the approximate reconstruction of the original data x, and x̄ is the global mean BPND value (1.56) removed prior to ICA extraction. For analysis purposes, the source maps were scaled to ICA-estimated BPND (B̃PM) through the product of (yM × ÃM,i). For display and anatomical assignment purposes, the scaled source maps were thresholded at B̃PM≥0.5 (with no cluster-extent threshold) based on the relevant range of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND of 1.5–4.
To examine source compositions relative to regional estimates of D2R/D3R availability, intensity-scaled source maps were generated for all subjects, and regional B̃PM values were extracted from the seven ROIs and compared the D2R-related and D3R-related proportions of BPND calculated using reported regional fractions of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND. That is, regional BPND values obtained in the ROI-based analysis (see Section 2.4. and Figure 1) were multiplied by average D2R-and D3R-related fractions reported in (Supplementary Table 1) to obtain regional estimates of local D2R/D3R BPND (i.e., ). Average regional B̃PM for each source were then examined in relation to the calculated estimates of  and  using Pearson correlations to assess potential association with D2R-related and D3R-related BPND proportions.
2.6. Statistical procedures
Group differences in ROI BPND values and ICA source intensities were assessed with two separate multivariate analyses of variance (i.e., group × ROI and group × source) and post-hoc univariate analyses. Due to non-tracer conditions of [11C]-(+)-PHNO for D3Rs at the administered dose, multivariate analyses including the estimated free concentration of [11C]-(+)-PHNO (based on the average mass concentration in the cerebellum from 90–120 mins, multiplied by the specific activity) as a covariate were performed and revealed no significant mass dose effect on results (p’s>0.4). Given reported associations between [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND and age and body-mass, all between-group multivariate and univariate analyses were repeated adjusting for age and body-mass. Additional analyses were performed to examine potential influences of alcohol use across all participants and cigarette smoking within CUD participants. Exploratory correlational analyses were performed to examine relationships between regional and source-based binding measures with years of cocaine use.
3. Results
Participant characteristics and radioactivity information are provided in Table 1. There were no group differences in body-mass or radiotracer injection parameters. CUD participants were more likely to be daily tobacco smokers (χ2=32.4, p<0.001) and did not differ from HCs in weekly alcohol consumption. ROI volumes (in subject/native space) did not differ between groups (p’s>0.1).
3.1. Regional analyses of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND
Results of ROI and whole-brain analyses are displayed in Figure 1. There was a main effect of group across ROIs (F7,44=3.87, p=0.002), with CUD relative to HC displaying greater BPND in the SN (t50=2.91, p=0.005) and lower BPND in the DPU (t50=2.14, p=0.037), while a group difference in the DCA did not reach significance (t50=1.79, p=0.080) (Figure 1a). Whole-brain analysis confirmed CUD relative to HC participants exhibited greater BPND in the midbrain and lower BPND in the dorsal striatum (Figure 1b). Consistent with previous reports, there was a significant association between age and BPND (F7,42=3.25, p=0.008), and a marginal association between body-mass and BPND (F7,42=2.23, p=0.051). Adjusting for influences of age and body-mass, group differences in the SN remained significant (F1,48=11.29, p=0.002) while differences in the DPU did not reach significance (F1,48=3.72, p=0.060). There was no main effect of alcohol use on BPND (F7,44=0.87, p=0.54), and group differences survived adjusting for the number of cigarettes smoked daily (F7,43=3.89, p=0.002). Within CUD participants, there was no association between BPND and daily cigarettes smoked (F7,18=0.55, p=0.79) or years of cocaine use (F7,18=1.07, p=0.42).
3.2. ICA of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND
The exploratory ICA identified three sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO binding that represent systems of brain regions displaying coherent variation in BPND through the sample (Figure 2; Table 2). Source 1 represented a ‘striatopallidal source’, with largest contributions in the DPU, DCA, GP, VP and VS. Source 2 represented a ‘pallidonigral source’ comprised of the SN, GP, VP and HY. Source 3 represented a ventral ‘mesoaccumbens source’ encompassing HY, VP, VS and anterior regions of the midbrain extending into the SN. Although extracted solely from the data, the identified sources were spatially consistent with the distribution of D2R-related and D3R-related availability across regions of interest (Figure 3). Specifically, regional B̃PM values of the striatopallidal source were associated with estimated D2R-related BPND proportions (r=0.89, p=0.008), and regional B̃PM of the pallidonigral source were associated with estimated D3R-related BPND proportions (r=0.89, p=0.007). The mesoaccumbens source was not associated with either D2R-related or D3R-related binding proportions (p’s>0.1).
ICA subject intensities for the three sources did not correlate with each other (p’s>0.2). There were no associations between source intensities and age (F3,46=1.53, p=0.22) or body-mass F3,46=1.80, p=0.16). There was no main effect of alcohol use on source intensities (F3,46=1.48, p=0.23).
3.3. [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND sources and CUD
There was a main effect of group on ICA-intensity across the three identified sources (F3,48=4.28, p=0.009). CUD relative to HC participants displayed lower intensities of the striatopallidal source (t50=2.58, p=0.013; Figure 3a) and greater intensity of the pallidonigral source (t50=2.03, p=0.047; Figure 3b). Group differences in the mesoaccumbens source did not reach significance (t50=1.63, p=0.109). Different from the regional analysis above, the intensity of the striatopallidal source was negatively associated with years of cocaine use (r=0.39, p=0.048; Figure 3a) and pallidonigral source intensity was positively correlated with years of cocaine use (r=0.40, p=0.042; Figure 3b). Group differences survived adjusting for the number of cigarettes smoked daily (F3,47=4.28, p=0.009), and within CUD participants there was no association between source intensities and the number of cigarettes smoked daily (F3,22=0.75, p=0.53).
4. Discussion
The current study extends prior research of D2R/D3R availability in CUD using [11C]-(+)-PHNO. Regional analyses revealed CUD-related dorsal striatal reductions in D2R-related BPND, consistent with D2R/D3Rantagonist radioligand research but not previously detected with the D3R-preferring [11C]-(+)-PHNO, and confirmed greater availability in the SN in CUD. Exploratory ICA identified three sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND that were correlated with regional proportions of D2R-related and D3R-related BPND and spatially consistent with known subcortical dopamine circuitry. Individuals with CUD relative to HC exhibited reduced intensity of a D2R-related striatopallidal source and greater intensity of a D3R-related pallidonigral source that were both associated with years of cocaine use, an association not found when analyzing regions individually. Notably, the ICA-identified sources suggest CUD-related alterations may be present in regions of mixed D2R/D3R concentration (e.g., ventral striatum, globus pallidus) not previously observed using traditional analyses of D2R/D3R radioligands. The current findings underscore the advantage of [11C]-(+)-PHNO in simultaneous investigation of both D2R and D3R alterations in addictions, especially when combined with ICA in exploring sources of dopamine receptor availability. The patterns of concurrently increased and decreased receptor availability, particularly within structures (e.g., the ventral striatum), lend insight into the clinical challenges of dopaminergic pharmacotherapy for CUD.
4.1. Regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND in CUD
Alterations in D2-like receptor systems in CUD have been reported using multiple radioligands, and the current ROI and whole-brain observations of greater midbrain and reduced dorsal striatal BPND are consistent with previous research. Reduced D2R-related BPND in the striatum and greater D3R-related BPND in the SN and have been linked to increased impulsivity in cocaine/stimulant addictions. Lower striatal D2R BPND has been associated with poor behavioral therapy outcomes in CUD. The relationship between reduced striatal BPND and years of cocaine use in the current study is consistent with preclinical evidence of the effects of cocaine exposure on D2R availability. Similarly, increases in D3R systems follow cocaine exposure in animal models, though the previous finding of a relationship between D3R-related SN BPND and years of cocaine use was not replicated in the current regional analysis. Dissociating potential dopaminergic vulnerabilities to addictive disorders and dopaminergic consequences of substance use remains an important area of addictions research.
4.2. Sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND
ICA identified three sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND that were correlated with estimated regional proportions of D2R-related and D3R-related BPND and spatially consistent with dopamine circuitry. The striatopallidal source was identified in nodes of the ‘indirect’ dopamine pathway linking the striatum (DPU, DCA and VS) to the SN through connections with the pallidum (GP and VP). The indirect pathway is comprised of D2R-expressing GABAergic medium spiny neurons interconnecting the striatum and pallidum. Consistent with this indirect pathway anatomy, the intensity of the identified striatopallidal source was strongly associated with estimated regional D2R components of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND. Preclinical models indicate striatopallidal D2R mechanisms may counterbalance reward-related responsivity, with impaired functioning associated with a greater sensitivity to drug-related rewards. Evidence also suggests a role of indirect-pathway striatal D2R with behavioral inflexibility relative to aversive conditions and compulsive cocaine-seeking.
The pallidonigral source identified by ICA was composed of regions highly correlated with estimates of regional proportions of D3R [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND. The pallidonigral source is spatially consistent with dopamine circuitry between the pallidal structures and the midbrain. While less is understood regarding specific functionality of D3R systems, integration of GP, VP and SN regions suggest a role of this system in drug-related reinforcement processing and motivational/appetitive states. Incentive salience models of addiction identify ‘wanting’ as a motivation state, dissociable from the hedonic state of ‘liking’, as a process that becomes sensitized over the course of an addiction, and is associated with greater D3R availability in the SN in polysubstance and methamphetamine users.
The mesoaccumbens source was identified in SN, VS and VP regions. While the SN and VP are D3R-rich regions, there was no relationship between regional source intensities and estimated D3R-related (or D3R-related) proportions of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND across ROIs. Decreased D2R/D3R availability in the SN and VS is associated with increased sensitivity to reinforcing effects of stimulants mediated through increased striatal dopamine release. Neuroadaptive increases in SN and VS D3R associated with cocaine exposure may act to downregulate the stimulant-induced release of dopamine in the striatum in individuals with CUD. While a functional role of D2R/D3R in VS and midbrain circuitry appears critical in balancing dopamine transmission in CUD, mesoaccumbens source intensities were not altered in CUD (or associated with years of cocaine use), and additional research and/or validation of the reliability of this source is warranted.
4.3. Clinical implications of D2-like receptor sources in addictive disorders
CUD-related differences in source intensities were consistent with regional analyses, broadly identifying lower D2R-related and greater D3R-related source intensities. ICA-identified sources extend individual regional observations, detecting CUD-related differences in regions characterized by mixed-D2R/D3R concentrations. Patterns of source-intensity difference suggest concurrent upregulation and downregulation of receptor availability in the VS and pallidal regions. In the current study, alterations in striatopallidal and pallidonigral sources, proposed to reflect complementary mechanisms of the indirect dopamine pathway, were associated with years of cocaine use. The intensities of these two sources were significantly related to CUD chronicity, suggesting receptor alterations may represent reciprocal compensatory adaptations through the course of addiction.
Despite extensive efforts to identify effective pharmacotherapies for CUD, there is currently no FDA-approved medication with an indication for CUD. Although it has been proposed that dopamine-agonist therapies may aid in the maintenance of cocaine abstinence, preclinical evidence of the influences of D2R and D3R agonists and antagonists on cocaine-related behaviors is mixed. The current findings illustrate the underlying complexity of targeting receptor subtypes that may integrate into multiple functional systems and influence drug-related behavior differently depending on the region of action. Adding to the challenge of dopaminergic pharmacotherapies are the neuroplastic adaptations associated with cocaine exposure and chronic use, suggesting dopaminergic interventions may be aimed at ‘moving targets’, resulting in heterogeneous response profiles across individuals at different stages of addiction.
4.4. Strengths and limitations
The current study investigated the largest sample of CUD participants completing [11C]-(+)-PHNO PET to date (N=26 relative to previous samples that included 10 to 16 individuals), and demonstrates [11C]-(+)-PHNO sensitivity to reductions in dorsal striatal D2R availability frequently reported in CUD using equal-affinity D2R/D3R antagonist radioligands. The current sample was largely comprised of previously reported subjects. ROI results of CUD-related BPND alterations in the DPU survived post-hoc analysis co-varying for cohort (p=0.03), suggesting greater statistical power (rather than potential differences in individual variability across independent cohorts) contributed to the significant detection of D2R-related differences in individuals with CUD. This study also represents the first application of ICA to explore sources of covarying D2R/D3R availability and examine alterations associated with CUD.
The data-driven ICA extraction was blind to the spatial distributions of D2R/D3R concentrations and blind to subject group assignments. The current mixed-sample design, while allowing direct comparison of source intensities in CUD relative to HC, identified three sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND and alternative strategies of component extraction (e.g., higher-dimension ICA) may identify alternative sources. Alternative computational strategies (e.g., principal component analysis; PCA) have also been used to investigate PET data using ROI-based and voxel-wise approaches, and may identify different factor structures in [11C]-(+)-PHNO data.
Proposed associations with D2R-related and D3R-related availability in identified sources were based on calculated estimates using fractions of D3R-related [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND derived in healthy controls using antagonists that are not 100% selective for D3R receptors. Thus, imprecise estimates, and potentially altered regional D2R/D3R-related fractions in individuals with CUD, limit conclusive determination of source signals relative to receptor subtypes. Research using ICA in conjunction with specific D2R and D3R blocking agents would be needed to validate these exploratory source compositions. Similarly, interpretations of potential functional involvement of identified sources was based on spatial patterns of regional integration relative to the extant and evolving literature, and direct examination of source relationships with measures of impulsivity, compulsivity, and substance use-related domains (e.g., self-administration, craving and cue-reactivity) may reveal alternative associations. Potential influences of co-occurring nicotine dependence in CUD participants on D2R/D3R availability warrants consideration given group differences in regular tobacco smoking. Though daily smoking amounts were not associated with PET results within CUD participants, future studies including a nicotine-dependent comparison sample would allow examination of cocaine-specific alterations in D2R/D3R receptor systems. Additional research is needed to replicate current observations and explore these dopamine systems in other addictive disorders.
4.5. Conclusions
The current study extends previous research of regional D2R/D3R availability in CUD measured with [11C]-(+)-PHNO, detecting lower BPND the dorsal striatum and replicating greater BPND in the midbrain. Source-based analysis using ICA identified three distinct sources of BPND, indicating lower intensity of a striatopallidal source and greater intensity of a pallidonigral source in CUD. These source-based patterns of BPND suggest cocaine-related alterations in D2R and D3R may not be limited to the dorsal striatum and midbrain respectively, but may extend into the pallidum and ventral striatum. Furthermore, the alterations in striatopallidal and pallidonigral sources were associated with duration of cocaine use, and may indicate reciprocal and compensatory mechanisms of dopaminergic function in addiction. Additional investigation into concurrent alterations in D2-like dopamine receptor systems (e.g., prior to drug exposure, during initial use and withdrawal, and following extended abstinence) should provide important insight into treatment development efforts for CUD.
Supplementary Material
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
           Declaration of interest         
The authors report that they have no financial conflicts of interest with respect to the content of this manuscript.
References
Effects of chronic cocaine abuse on postsynaptic dopamine receptors
Decreased striatal dopaminergic responsiveness in detoxified cocaine-dependent subjects
Cocaine dependence and d2 receptor availability in the functional subdivisions of the striatum: relationship with cocaine-seeking behavior
Amphetamine-induced dopamine release: markedly blunted in cocaine dependence and predictive of the choice to self-administer cocaine
Stimulant-induced dopamine increases are markedly blunted in active cocaine abusers
Cocaine uptake is decreased in the brain of detoxified cocaine abusers
In vivo evidence for reduced striatal vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT2) availability in cocaine abusers
Dopamine D3 receptor alterations in cocaine-dependent humans imaged with [11C](+)PHNO
Heightened D3 dopamine receptor levels in cocaine dependence and contributions to the addiction behavioral phenotype: a positron emission tomography study with [11C]-+-PHNO
Efficacy of indirect dopamine agonists for psychostimulant dependence: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Dopamine agonists for the treatment of cocaine dependence
In vivo imaging of cerebral dopamine D3 receptors in alcoholism
Alcohol dependence is associated with blunted dopamine transmission in the ventral striatum
Association of low striatal dopamine D2 receptor availability with nicotine dependence similar to that seen with other drugs of abuse
Deficits in dopamine D2 receptors and presynaptic dopamine in heroin dependence: commonalities and differences with other types of addiction
Low level of brain dopamine D2 receptors in methamphetamine abusers: association with metabolism in the orbitofrontal cortex
Heightened dopaminergic response to amphetamine at the D3 dopamine receptor in methamphetamine users
Dopamine receptor subtypes in reward and relapse
Contributions of dopamine D1, D2, and D3 receptor subtypes to the disruptive effects of cocaine on prepulse inhibition in mice
Double dissociation of the effects of haloperidol and the dopamine D3 receptor antagonist ABT-127 on acquisition vs. expression of cocaine-conditioned activity in rats
Selective blockade of dopamine D3 receptors enhances while D2 receptor antagonism impairs social novelty discrimination and novel object recognition in rats: a key role for the prefrontal cortex
Higher binding of the dopamine D3 receptor-preferring ligand [11C]-(+)-propyl-hexahydro-naphtho-oxazin in methamphetamine polydrug users: a positron emission tomography study
Distribution of dopamine D3 receptor expressing neurons in the human forebrain: comparison with D2 receptor expressing neurons
Imaging dopamine receptors in humans with [11C]-(+)-PHNO: dissection of D3 signal and anatomy
Mathematical modelling of [11C]-(+)-PHNO human competition studies
Imaging of dopamine D2/3 agonist binding in cocaine dependence: a [11C] NPA positron emission tomography study
Expression and pharmacological characterization of the human D3 dopamine receptor
Affinity and selectivity of [11C]-(+)-PHNO for the D3 and D2 receptors in the rhesus monkey brain in vivo
In vivo quantification of regional dopamine-D3 receptor binding potential of (+)-PHNO: Studies in non-human primates and transgenic mice
Imaging dopamine D3 receptors in the human brain with positron emission tomography, [11C]PHNO, and a selective D3 receptor antagonist
Blockade of [11C](+)-PHNO binding in human subjects by the dopamine D3 receptor antagonist ABT-925
A preliminary study of dopamine D2/3 receptor availability and social status in healthy and cocaine dependent humans imaged with [11C](+)PHNO

The validity of Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI): The development and validation of a structured diagnostic interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10
Parametric imaging and test–retest variability of 11C-(+)-PHNO binding to D2/D3 dopamine receptors in humans on the high-resolution research tomograph PET Scanner
Radiosynthesis and Evaluation of [11C]-(+)-4-Propyl-3, 4, 4a, 5, 6, 10b-hexahydro-2 H-naphtho [1, 2-b][1, 4] oxazin-9-ol as a Potential Radiotracer for in Vivo Imaging of the Dopamine D2 High-Affinity State with Positron Emission Tomography
Design of a motion-compensation OSEM list-mode algorithm for resolution-recovery reconstruction for the HRRT
Noise reduction in the simplified reference tissue model for neuroreceptor functional imaging
[11C] PHNO parametric imaging and test-retest study in humans using the HRRT scanner
A probabilistic atlas and reference system for the human brain: International Consortium for Brain Mapping (ICBM)
Unified segmentation
Imaging human mesolimbic dopamine transmission with positron emission tomography&colon; I. Accuracy and precision of D2 receptor parameter measurements in ventral striatum
Source-based morphometry: The use of independent component analysis to identify gray matter differences with application to schizophrenia
Estimating the number of independent components for functional magnetic resonance imaging data
An information-maximization approach to blind separation and blind deconvolution
Ventral striatum binding of a dopamine D 2/3 receptor agonist but not antagonist predicts normal body mass index
Age-related changes in binding of the D2/3 receptor radioligand [11C](+)PHNO in healthy volunteers
Lack of age-dependent decrease in dopamine D3 receptor availability: A [11C]-(+)-PHNO and [11C]-raclopride positron emission tomography study
Body mass index relationships with dopamine D3 receptor availability as measured by [11C](+)PHNO
Striatal dopamine d2/d3 receptor availability is reduced in methamphetamine dependence and is linked to impulsivity
Imaging dopamine transmission in cocaine dependence: link between neurochemistry and response to treatment
PET imaging of dopamine D2 receptors during chronic cocaine self-administration in monkeys
Dopamine receptor expression and distribution dynamically change in the rat nucleus accumbens after withdrawal from cocaine self-administration
Increases in dopamine D3 receptor binding in rats receiving a cocaine challenge at various time points after cocaine self-administration: implications for cocaine-seeking behavior
Biomarkers in substance use disorders
Transient neuronal inhibition reveals opposing roles of indirect and direct pathways in sensitization
Pathway-specific modulation of nucleus accumbens in reward and aversive behavior via selective transmitter receptors
Distinct roles for direct and indirect pathway striatal neurons in reinforcement
Strengthening the accumbal indirect pathway promotes resilience to compulsive cocaine use
The neural basis of addiction: a pathology of motivation and choice
Roles of “wanting” and “liking” in motivating behavior: gambling, food, and drug addictions
Dopaminergic network differences in human impulsivity
Adaptive increase in D3 dopamine receptors in the brain reward circuits of human cocaine fatalities
Agonist medications for the treatment of cocaine use disorder
Cocaine self-administration in dopamine D3 receptor knockout mice
Reduction of cocaine self-administration and D3 receptor-mediated behavior by two novel dopamine D3 receptor-selective partial agonists, OS-3-106 and WW-III-55
Effects of chronic buspirone treatment on cocaine self-administration
Role of dopamine D2-like receptors in cocaine self-administration: studies with D2 receptor mutant mice and novel D2 receptor antagonists
Differential effects of the dopamine D2/D3 receptor antagonist sulpiride on self-administration of morphine into the ventral tegmental area or the nucleus accumbens
The effect of model order selection in group PICA
The interrelationship of dopamine D2-like receptor availability in striatal and extrastriatal brain regions in healthy humans: a principal component analysis of [18 F] fallypride binding
Efficient principal component analysis for multivariate 3D voxel-based mapping of brain functional imaging data sets as applied to FDG-PET and normal aging
Regional analyses of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND. (a) Region of interest (ROI) analysis performed on smoothed parametric images. CUD relative to HC participants displayed reduced BPND in the dorsal putamen (DPU; *p<0.05) and greater BPND in the substantia nigra (SN, **p<0.01). Error bars indicate SD. (b) Whole-brain mean BPND across all participants with relative threshold mask borders used in GLM and ICA analyses indicated by the white outline (left) and GLM-identified regions of group differences in [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND (right). CUD relative to HC exhibited greater BPND in midbrain regions (red/yellow) and reduced BPND in the putamen (blue/green). Axial slices displayed at p<0.005, k>20 on MNI152. Abbreviations: DCA, dorsal caudate; DPU, dorsal putamen; GP, globus pallidus; HY, hypothalamus; SN, substantia nigra; VP, ventral pallidum; VS, ventral striatum.
ICA-identified sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND displayed at B̃PM ≥0.5 on different intensity scales as denoted in the color bars.
Source associations with estimated regional D2R-related and D3R-related BPND proportions, group intensity differences and correlation with years of cocaine use for the (a) striatopallidal and (b) pallidonigral sources. Regional estimates of D2R-related and D3R-related BPND were calculated using reported fractions of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND (see Section 2.5). Subject ICA-loadings refer to the mixing parameter representing source intensity, or how strongly each source contributed to the aggregate BPND signal. Error bars indicate SD. *p<0.05.
Sample characteristics and injection data.
Variable	HC (N=26)	CUD (N=26)	p-value	 	Age, years (SD)	41.3 (6.9)	42.7 (6.4)	0.46	 	Gender, F (%)	5 (19.2)	5 (19.2)	1.00	 	Body-mass, BMI (SD)	28.7 (6.0)	29.9 (6.5)	0.47	 	Daily tobacco user, N (%)	1 (3.8)	22 (84.6)	<0.001	 	Daily tobacco use, cigarettes (SD)	0.4 (2.0)	9.2 (6.4)	<0.001	 	Weekly alcohol use, drinks (SD)	1.4 (2.2)	6.8 (14.6)	0.75	 	Amount of cocaine per use, $ (SD)	-	112.7 (148.5)	-	 	Frequency of use, days/month (SD)	-	19.0 (7.7)	-	 	Last cocaine use before PET, days (SD)	-	7.8 (4.9)	-	 	CUD chronicity, years (SD)	-	19.3 (6.3)	-	 	Radioactive dose, MBq (SD)	398 (155)	370 (146)	0.51	 	Injected mass, µg/kg (SD)	0.024 (0.007)	0.025 (0.006)	0.63	 	Specific activity, MBq/nmol (SD)	56.7 (30.3)	46.9 (19.5)	0.17	 	
Regional composition of sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND.
Component/region	k	x	y	z	peak B̃PMM	 	a. Striatopallidal						 	  L DPU, DCA, GP, VP, VS	1467	−10	8	−8	3.20	 	  R DPU, DCA, GP, VP, VS	1416	14	6	−4	3.06	 	b. Pallidonigral						 	  R GP, HY, SN, VP	457	12	2	−10	1.60	 	  L GP, HY, SN, VP	579	−14	−2	−8	1.97	 	c. Mesoaccumbens						 	  R SN	5	10	−14	−16	0.59	 	  L SN	6	−6	−12	−16	0.62	 	  R HY, VP, VS	243	10	10	−12	1.23	 	  L HY, VP, VS	259	−8	8	−14	1.39	 	
Regional composition of ICA-identified sources at the threshold of ICA-estimated BPND contribution (B̃PM) ≥0.5. Cluster information includes spatial extent (k, in voxels), peak location (x, y, z) in MNI152 space and peak B̃PM.
Abbreviations: DCA, dorsal caudate; DPU, dorsal putamen; GP, globus pallidus; HY, hypothalamus; SN, substantia nigra; VP, ventral pallidum; VS, ventral striatum; R/L, right/left hemisphere.
Highlights
[11C]-(+)-PHNO binding potential reflects the relative local availability of both D2 and D3 receptors
Regional analysis indicated alterations in D2R-rich and D3R-rich regions in cocaine-use disorder
ICA identified source-based patterns of receptor availability consistent with DA circuitry
Source intensities suggest CUD-related differences may also be present in D2R/D3R-mixed regions
