Analysis of alcohol use disorders from the Nathan Kline Institute-Rockland Sample: Correlation of brain cortical thickness with neuroticism*
Background
Although differences in both neuroanatomical measures and personality traits, in particular neuroticism, have been associated with alcohol use disorders (AUD), whether lifetime AUD diagnosis alters the relationship between neuroticism and neuroanatomical structures remains to be determined.
Methods
Data from 65 patients with lifetime AUD diagnoses and 65 healthy comparisons (HC) group-matched on age, sex and race were extracted from the Nathan Kline Institute - Rockland Sample data set. Each subject completed personality trait measures and underwent MRI scanning. Cortical thickness measures at 68 Desikan-Killiany Atlas regions were obtained using FreeSurfer 5.3.0. Regression analyses were performed to identify brain regions at which the neuroticism-cortical thickness relationship was altered by lifetime AUD status.
Results
As expected, AUDs had higher neuroticism scores than HCs. Correlations between neuroticism and cortical thickness in the left insula and right fusiform differed significantly across groups. Higher neuroticism score in AUD and the interaction between the insular cortical thickness-neuroticism correlation and AUD status were confirmed in a replication study using the Human Connectome Project data set.
Conclusions
Results confirmed the relationship between neuroticism and AUD and suggests that specific cortical regions, particularly the left insula, represent anatomic substrates underlying this association in AUD.
1. INTRODUCTION
Alcohol use disorders (AUD), including alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence, continue to be a major and complex public health problem. The detrimental consequences of AUD include brain damage leading to executive function impairment and memory loss. To reduce deleterious health impacts and the associated economic loss, mechanistic understanding of AUD pathogenesis is required for developing more effective strategies for AUD prevention and treatment. Decades of studies have suggested biological factors and social and interpersonal influences as the major risk factors for the development of AUD.
Among the many risk factors, personality traits have been long recognized as important contributors to the development of AUD. The Five Factor Model (FFM) is a widely accepted framework that organizes personality traits along five dimensions: openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness and neuroticism. Neuroticism, the most frequently examined of these in AUD studies, entails the tendency to experience negative emotions including anger, anxiety, depression and vulnerability. Neuroticism can be quantified with the standardized NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEOFFI). Those high in neuroticism are more likely to be impacted by persistent negative feelings. While personality traits, including neuroticism, are considered stable and enduring aspects of individuals with substantial heritability, it has been argued that personality can affect alcohol consumption or shape the development of AUD. Studies have indicated that neuroticism is positively correlated with AUD or variation in drinking patterns. Hicks et al. reported the interesting finding that negative emotionality traits at age 11 predict the onset and course (persistence vs. desistence) of AUD and that the course of AUD can affect the rate of personality change. This finding suggests that neuroticism and AUD can have reciprocal effects during development, indicating a complex relationship between AUD and neuroticism.
A number of studies have focused on the neural correlates of neuroticism and AUD, using various brain imaging technologies such as structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) and functional MRI (fMRI). With regard to the brain correlates of neuroticism, several sMRI studies have reported negative correlations of neuroticism with global grey matter volume, thickness of the left orbitofrontal cortex, white matter volume in the superior medial frontal gyrus, volumes in several prefrontal regions and volumes in left medial temporal lobe and in cingulate gyrus. More than a dozen fMRI studies that included cognitive tasks involving emotional conflict or facial stimuli processing have suggested that neuroticism is strongly associated with activity in amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) although medial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and insula are also involved. In addition, a recent fMRI study found that right superior parietal cortex activation in the task-independent default mode network was negatively correlated with neuroticism. Taken together, the findings from these brain imaging studies suggest that neuroticism is related to certain specific brain regions that are involved in the perception of negative stimuli and/or exert their control over such stimuli.
Similar brain imaging studies have been performed on AUD, and the observed structural and functional changes in the brain that are strongly associated with the development and/or severity of AUDs have been summarized in several recent reviews or meta-analyses. Although the brain structure-functional networks that underlie the development or consequence of AUD remain to be definitively identified, studies have started to shed some light on the structural and functional correlates of AUD. In general, AUD is associated with structural changes, including reductions in grey matter and white matter volume and cortical thickness in multiple brain regions from the neocortex (in particular the frontal lobes), the limbic system (including hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus and anterior cingulate) and the cerebellum. These structural features reflect alterations in various functional domains including personality.
Despite increasing efforts to examine the relationships between AUD and neuroticism and between AUD or neuroticism and neuroanatomy, no study linking AUD, neuroticism and neuroanatomical measures has been reported yet. In this work, we focused on brain cortical thickness, a measure that has been regarded as an indicator of cortical integrity and the most invariant brain size parameter across species. Specifically, we attempted to gain initial insights into the possible correlation of brain cortical thickness phenotypes with neuroticism scores and AUD diagnostic status, using the community-based Nathan Kline Institute-Rockland Sample (NKI-RS). In the NKI-RS, volunteers from Rockland County, New York, are deeply phenotyped with advanced neuroimaging and DNA samples available to the research community, with the goal of accelerating the pace of discovery science in psychiatry. As of September, 2015, behavioral measurements and structural imaging data were available for 494 subjects. After screening, we had 65 individuals with a lifetime history of AUD. Sixty-five healthy comparisons (HC) were selected to match the cases on age, sex, and race as closely as possible. To confirm the replicability of our results, we used data from the Human Connectome Project.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Participants
Participants were drawn from the first eight releases of the NKI-RS. As part of a larger battery of measures, each participant completed the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders (SCID). Study staff provided a diagnostic summary for each participant based on semi-structured interviews. Among 494 subjects with publicly available behavioral measurements and structural image data as of September 2015, those who met any of the following criteria were excluded: 1) age below 18 years; 2) diagnosis of other psychiatric disorders without AUD; 3) a diagnosis of epilepsy and/or a history of seizures; 4) subjects who ever lost consciousness due to head injury; 5) missing data on age, sex, race, age at drinking onset, neuroticism, and/or brain structural measure; and 6) subjects with AUD diagnosis history but reporting no lifetime alcohol consumption. Also exclusionary for healthy comparisons were 7) substance (including alcohol, cannabis, opioid, cocaine et al.) involvement scores greater than 3; and 8) inconsistency regarding substance use between self-report and lab results. This screen resulted in a total of 172 subjects. From these, 65 patients with AUD comprised our disease group, and 65 subjects with no Axis I diagnosis, group-matched on age, sex and race, were selected as HC.
2.2. MRI image pre-processing and data processing
T1-weighted structural imaging was obtained using a magnetization prepared, rapid-acquisition gradient-echo (MPRAGE) sequence with 1 mm isotropic resolution (TR=1900 ms). The structural images were preprocessed using the recon-all pipeline from FreeSurfer version 5.3.0, which is an extensively used robust pipeline optimized for 1 mm isotropic data. Mean cortical thicknesses of 68 gyral regions based on the Desikan-Killiany atlas were extracted for each participant. Quality control of cortical measurements followed the steps outlined in the ENIGMA protocol (http://enigma.ini.usc.edu/protocols/imaging-protocols/). Briefly, subjects with outlying cortical thickness were identified and visually checked to make sure that they were properly segmented. In addition, we visually inspected the snapshots of cortical surface segmentations from both internal slices and external surfaces of the brain to make sure that cortical regions were properly segmented and labeled.
2.3. Personality trait assessments and covariates
Scores for neuroticism and other personality traits were calculated based on 60 items from the NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI). All analyses controlled for the covariates of age, sex, race (i.e., Caucasian or not), full scale intelligence based on Wechsler abbreviated scale of intelligence quotient (IQ), past childhood traumatic event status, smoking and marijuana use status, and age at drinking onset. Hollingshead four-factor index of socioeconomic status (SES) and laterality index from Edinburgh handedness questionnaire (handedness) were also considered as possible confounders. However, their inclusion did not alter the pattern of results and degraded prediction accuracy. Accordingly, they were not included in analyses
2.4. Statistical analyses
Two sample t-tests and chi-square tests were used to test for differences in continuous and categorical covariates between participants with lifetime AUD diagnosis and healthy comparisons. Multiple linear regression analyses were used to estimate group differences in personality traits. Personality traits from the NEO five-factor model were our primary behavioral measures. In the subsequent analysis of brain-behavior relationship we focused only on neuroticism, as this was the only measure showing a significant group difference.
To identify brain regions where a lifetime history of AUD moderated the relationship between neuroticism and cortical thickness, a two-stage procedure, namely screening and formal model testing, was used. Rational for the use of this two-stage procedure can be found in Supplementary Material S2 1 . We assumed that only few brain regions were relevant. In screening stage, the main goal is to identifying a subset of potentially relevant brain regions. The L2Boosting algorithm was used to select a subset of potentially relevant brain regions. Specifically, a linear model with neuroticism as response variable was fitted by least squares method. Predictors in the linear model include cortical thickness in 68 regions, their interactions with AUD status, and a set of confounding variables. Next, L2Boosting iteratively fit the linear model to current least square residuals. The final boosting estimator was constructed via a linear combination of multiple estimates. To avoid overfitting, the Akaike Information Criterion stopping rule was employed to stop boosting at a suitable number of iterations. Analyses of brain-behavior relationships were focused only on the regions selected by the L2Boosting algorithm. In model testing stage, linear regression models, with each selected brain region as an outcome measure, were used to test whether there was a significant group by neuroticism effect. All tests are two-sided at false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted significance level of 0.05. Multiple comparisons were adjusted for behavioral measures and brain-behavior relationships, respectively. Finally, vertex-based analysis was performed to localize significant findings. Specifically, we pre-smoothed the cortical thickness data by full width half maximum of 10 mm onto the surface fsaverage6 for each subject. Multiple linear models were used to test the interaction effects of group and neuroticism on the cortical thickness at each vertex on the above three regions. Analyses were performed using R version 3.4.0 (The R Project for Statistical Computing).
3. RESULTS
3.1. Sample characteristics
The HC and AUD subjects did not differ in age, sex, race, IQ, handedness, SES, or age at drinking onset. More AUD subjects reported having experienced childhood traumatic events (78.5%) as opposed to 52.3% for HC subjects. There was a significant difference in tobacco and marijuana use status. More AUD subjects reported to be current (35.4%) and past (44.6%) tobacco user as opposed to 16.9% and 29.2% for HC subjects. The prevalence of current and past marijuana user was higher in AUD subjects (29.2% and 52.3%, respectively) than in HCs (10.8% and 36.9%). Only 20.0 % and 18.5% AUD subjects, compared to 53.9% and 52.3% in HC subjects, reported they had never smoked and never used marijuana, respectively (Table 1). There were no significant group differences in estimated total intracranial volume or mean cortical thickness in either hemisphere.
3.2. AUD subjects had higher neuroticism scores
Multiple linear regression models were used to test group differences in NEO-FFI personality traits (Table 2). Neuroticism was the only trait differing significantly between groups after multiple comparison adjustments. Specifically, controlling for age, sex and race, AUDs had significantly higher neuroticism scores than HCs (q=0.043; q-values represent FDR adjusted p-values). Group status alone explained 4.3% of the variation in neuroticism scores. The estimated mean neuroticism score in AUDs was 3.5 points higher than in HCs. The finding of elevated neuroticism score in AUDs was consistent with prior reports.
3.3. Lifetime AUD diagnosis alters correlations between cortical thickness and neuroticism
A two-step procedure was used to assess whether a lifetime history of AUD altered the relationship between neuroticism and cortical thickness in certain brain regions. In Step 1, three brain regions, i.e., left insula, postcentral gyrus and right fusiform, were selected by L2Boosting, indicating lifetime AUD history might alter the association between neuroticism and cortical thickness at these brain regions. In Step 2, multiple linear models were used to assess the relationship. Regression analyses showed that lifetime AUD diagnosis altered the relationship between neuroticism and cortical thickness at left insula (q=0.019) and right fusiform (q=0.011). We failed to detect a significant diagnosis by neuroticism interaction at left postcentral gyrus (q=0.918).
Subsequent subgroup analysis revealed that in HCs a positive but non-significant correlation between neuroticism and cortical thickness was observed in the left insula (β=0.002, P=0.465) and right fusiform (β=0.005, P=0.146). However, in AUDs the cortical thickness of both regions showed a significant inverse correlation with neuroticism in the left insula (β=-0.005, P=0.040) and right fusiform (β=-0.007, P=0.008), respectively (Fig. 1). These results indicate that AUD diagnosis affected the correlations between cortical thickness and neuroticism.
To facilitate interpretation, secondary vertex-based analysis was performed to localize findings. Multiple linear models were used to assess the interaction effects of group and neuroticism on cortical thickness at each vertex for the three implicated regions. As shown in Fig. 3, significant vertices were located mainly in left anterior and posterior insula, and the lateral and medial aspects of the right fusiform gyrus. These explicatory results are displayed at p-value of 0.05 without multiple comparison adjustment.
3.4. Validation using the Human Connectome Project
To determine the replicability of our findings, we examined AUD samples from the HCP data set. Using similar criteria (Supplementary Material S12), we selected 107 AUD subjects and 107 HC. As in the NKI-RS data set, controlling for age, gender, race, smoking and marijuana use status, age at drinking onset, and age-adjusted picture vocabulary score as a proxy for IQ, we found that a high neuroticism score was associated with AUD (β=-3.06, P=0.03) (Fig. 2A). With regard to the brain regions in which lifetime AUD history was associated with distinct cortical thickness and neuroticism correlations in NKI-RS, the result for the left insula (P=0.003) was unequivocally significant (Fig. 2B). Similar to the finding for the NKI-RS data (Fig. 1A), subgroup analysis revealed the correlation between neuroticism and cortical thickness at the left insula was significant in AUD (β=−0.005, P=0.002) but not in HC (β=0.002, P=0.258). The result for fusiform gyrus was also significant (P=0.041), though subgroup analysis did not show significant correlations between cortical thickness and neuroticism in AUDs (β=−0.002, P=0.275) and HCs (β=0.003, P=0.073). Due to the dense nature of HCP data and computational limitations, vertex level explicatory analyses were not performed for the HCP data.
4. DISCUSSION
We confirmed that individuals with lifetime AUDs had higher neuroticism scores than healthy comparisons in both NKI-RS and HCP data sets; we did not confirm associations of other personality traits, such as extraversion or consciousness, with AUDs. This could be partly due to our using community-based samples in which more than 95% of participants with AUDs had a past rather than a current AUD diagnosis, with less extreme behavior measures than found in treatment-seeking AUD subjects. This suggests the link between neuroticism and AUD may be more enduring than other personality traits.
The impact of AUD status on the relationship between neuroticism and cortical thickness has not previously been reported. In the NKI-RS, we found a significant negative correlation between neuroticism and cortical thickness in the left insula and right fusiform in participants with lifetime AUD diagnosis. By contrast, this relationship was not observed in HCs. The lack of correlation between cortical thickness of the left insula and right fusiform in HC is consistent with prior studies in healthy samples. Our novel finding that lifetime AUD diagnosis impacts the correlation between neuroticism and cortical thickness at specific brain regions is a step towards dissecting the complex relationship between brain structure, AUD and neuroticism. It also supports the utility of community-based samples for identifying biological and psychological risk factors impacting AUD.
The most compellingly replicable result was our observation of negative correlations between left insular cortical thickness and neuroticism in AUD subjects in both the NKI-RS and the HCP data sets, suggesting that left insular cortical thickness could be a reliable brain endophenotype linking AUD and neuroticism. The insula is involved in multiple processes including perception, motor control, self-consciousness, cognitive functioning, and emotional regulation, and it has been particularly linked to addictive behaviors. Our vertex-based analysis revealed that the correlation between neuroticism and cortical thickness was predominantly affected by AUD status in both anterior and posterior subdivisions of the left insula. The literature on structure-functional relationships in the insula is conflicted. Bilateral insula damage was associated with loss of addictive craving, but reduction in insular cortical thickness has also been reported in cocaine addiction and in alcohol dependent subjects. In addition, substance users have been found to show reduced posterior insula activity during risky choice tasks, as well as increased insula activity in response to drug-related cues. In the same vein, severity of alcohol addiction has been positively associated with cue-induced insula activity. In cocaine addiction, insula involvement has been understood on the basis of interconnections with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in normative functioning of the reward system. Furthermore, the strong emotional states produced by substance abuse have been proposed to enhance insula connectivity, which in turn leads to strong associations between drugs of abuse and emotional states in drug abusing subjects. Interestingly, several studies have indicated that activation in the anterior subdivision of the left insula is negatively correlated with emotional control-related neuroticism. We speculate that the insula-neuroticism correlation we observed in AUD may reflect the same relationship.
Our finding that AUD impacted the correlation between neuroticism and cortical thickness in the anterior and posterior insula supports the tentative suggestion that this effect may involve pain perception in participants with AUDs. Our vertex-based analysis result pinpointing both anterior and posterior subdivisions of the insula is consistent with the involvement of both these subdivisions in pain perception. Pain sensations evoked from various painful stimuli are relayed to dorsal posterior insula via the spinothalamocortical pathway and then integrated in the anterior subdivision. AUD has been increasingly viewed as a chronic pain disorder based on accumulating pathophysiological observation and brain imaging evidence. Alcohol administration is believed to trigger an initial rewarding and pain alleviating response, although excessive alcohol intoxication and withdrawal episodes can dysregulate brain stress and reward circuits. Such repeated episodes can lead to a persistent negative affective state that in turn motivates excessive alcohol consumption to restore the normal emotional state. Neuroticism score, which was higher in participants with AUDs than in HCs, has been reported to be negatively related to pain tolerance. The insula’s fundamental role in human pain perception is further supported by its being the most consistently activated region in response to abnormal and induced pain. Finally, the insula is also activated in subjects with alcohol dependence during reward anticipation. Therefore, our observation in two independent data sets that the insula cortical thickness-neuroticism correlation differs in participants with AUD versus HCs may also be explained by the intriguing, albeit untested, hypothesis that insula cortex dysfunction, indexed by structural differences, may mediate the impact of alcohol consumption on affective pain states, consequently contributing to the development of AUDs. Clearly, understanding the potential role of the insula in addiction requires further investigation.
The study which reported the association between insular activity and AUD also showed associations of AUD with cue-induced activity in fusiform gyrus, among others. In the NKI-RS dataset, we also found a significant negative correlation between right fusiform cortical thickness and neuroticism in AUDs. This correlation was non-significantly positive in HCs. The relationship between AUD history and the correlation between neuroticism and right fusiform cortical thickness replicated in the HCP (P =0.041). However, exploratory subgroup analyses did not replicate strictly. The significant negative neuroticism-right fusiform gyrus correlation in AUDs (P =0.008) in NKI-RS data was not significant (P =0.275) in HCP data. We interpret this result as broadly but not completely convergent with our NKI-RS finding. Despite the lack of complete replication, prior results implicate the right fusiform in AUD or emotional control. Right fusiform cortical thickness was recently found to be negatively correlated with lifetime alcohol use in adolescent alcohol users. Similarly, in subjects with AUD, significant activation in bilateral fusiform gyri correlated with the level of craving to alcohol cues (; Park et al., 2007). In addition, the fusiform gyrus has been linked to neural pathways involved in face recognition and responding to emotional faces. A negative correlation between activation in the right fusiform gyrus and neuroticism during anticipation of visceral pain has also been reported.
Our study has several limitations. First, the sample sizes from the NKI-RS (130 subjects) and HCP (214 subjects) datasets are relatively small. These resulted from our matched case-control design, which we adopted to reduce possible confounding. Second, about 50% of participants with histories of AUDs were comorbid with at least one other psychiatric disorder. Specifically, 26.2%, 10.8%, 9.2% and 6.1% subjects comorbid with 1, 2, 3, and more than 3 other disorders, respectively (Table 1). The top three comorbidities were cannabis use disorder (23.1%), major depressive disorder (21.5%), and cocaine use disorder (12.3%). Exploratory analysis, using AUD subjects without other comorbid disorders, revealed that the neuroticism-cortical thickness correlation remained to be negative in both brain regions. However, the relationship was not statistically significant. Therefore, the effect of comorbid psychiatric disorders on the cortical thickness-neuroticism relationship warrants further investigation in a larger study. Third, the insula cortex finding was replicated in an independent data set, but the subgroup analysis of fusiform result did not strictly replicate. Thus, the complex relationship among cortical thickness, neuroticism, and AUD status in the fusiform must be interpreted as preliminary. Fourth, our findings do not address cause-effect relationships. Clearly, well-controlled longitudinal studies are needed to delineate the potential causative factors involved in neuroticism and AUD development.
In conclusion, as a first step towards the dissection of the complex relationship among AUD, neuroticism and brain structure, we used a novel machine learning tool to analyze data from two community-based samples. Our results suggest that neuroticism is related to AUD status, which affects the correlation of neuroticism with cortical thickness in the left posterior insula and right fusiform gyrus in both NKI-RS and HCP data sets. Future work on the dissection of the mechanisms underlying AUD-neuroticism interactions will provide further insights into the relationship between specific brain loci, AUD and neuroticism, which may contribute to the development of more effective strategies for preventing and treating AUD.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary material can be found by accessing the online version of this paper at http://dx.doi.org and by entering doi:...
Supplementary material can be found by accessing the online version of this paper at http://dx.doi.org and by entering doi:...
Supplementary material can be found by accessing the online version of this paper at http://dx.doi.org and by entering doi:...
           Conflict of interest         
The authors declared no conflicts of interest related to this research.
           Contributors         
Author YZ processed and analyzed the imaging and personality data, interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript. ZLZ interpreted results and wrote the manuscript. FXC provided expertise in data interpretation and revised the manuscript.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Personality is reflected in the brain's intrinsic functional architecture
Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing
Involvement of the spino-parabrachio-amygdaloid and -hypothalamic pathways in the autonomic and affective emotional aspects of pain
Neuronal correlates of the five factor model (FFM) of human personality: multimodal imaging in a large healthy sample
Alcohol and the human brain: a systematic review of different neuroimaging methods
Boosting for high-dimensional linear models
Identifying neurobiological phenotypes associated with alcohol use disorder severity
Childhood personality predicts alcohol abuse in young adults
Neuroticism influences brain activity during the experience of visceral pain
Emotional processing and brain activity in youth at high risk for alcoholism
An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest
Testing predictions from personality neuroscience
Revisiting the role of the insula in addiction
Cortical thickness, surface area, and volume of the brain reward system in alcohol dependence: relationships to relapse and extended abstinence
Alcohol dependence as a chronic pain disorder
Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain
Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex
Personality
Personality and alcohol consumption: pooled analysis of 72,949 adults from eight cohort studies
Relationship between personality change and the onset and course of alcohol dependence in young adulthood
Neural activity of the anterior insula in emotional processing depends on the individuals' emotional susceptibility
Cortical thickness in adolescent marijuana and alcohol users: a three-year prospective study from adolescence to young adulthood
Factors modulating neural reactivity to drug cues in addiction: a survey of human neuroimaging studies
Medication treatment of different types of alcoholism
The five factors of personality and regional cortical variability in the Baltimore longitudinal study of aging
Neural correlates of personality: an integrative review
Heterogeneity of alcohol use disorder: understanding mechanisms to advance personalized treatment
The Big Five of Personality and structural imaging revisited: a VBM - DARTEL study
Cortical thickness abnormalities in cocaine addiction--a reflection of both drug use and a pre-existing disposition to drug abuse?
Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys
Family history of alcoholism, alcohol use disorders and the five- factor model of personality
A contemplated revision of the NEO Five-Factor Inventory
Insular activity during passive viewing of aversive stimuli reflects individual differences in state negative affect
Personality traits and global self-esteem of alcohol addicts
White matter volume in alcohol use disorders: a meta-analysis
Dissecting the genetic architecture of human personality
The hidden island of addiction: the insula
Damage to the insula disrupts addiction to cigarette smoking
The NKI-Rockland sample: a model for accelerating the pace of discovery science in psychiatry
The biological and psychological basis of neuroticism: current status and future directions
Alcohol: effects on neurobehavioral functions and the brain
Representation of pain and somatic sensation in the human insula: a study of responses to direct electrical cortical stimulation
Brain substrates of craving to alcohol cues in subjects with alcohol use disorder
Analgesic effects of ethanol are influenced by family history of alcoholism and neuroticism
Perspectives on the neuroscience of alcohol from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
The Big Five default brain: functional evidence
Functional neuroimaging studies of alcohol cue reactivity: a quantitative meta-analysis and systematic review
How acute and chronic alcohol consumption affects brain networks: insights from multimodal neuroimaging
The dorsal posterior insula subserves a fundamental role in human pain
Neuroticism and the brain: a quantitative meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies investigating emotion processing
Anxiety positive subjects show altered processing in the anterior insula during anticipation of negative stimuli
Striatum and insula dysfunction during reinforcement learning differentiates abstinent and relapsed methamphetamine-dependent individuals
The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an overview
Impulsiveness and insula activation during reward anticipation are associated with genetic variants in GABRA2 in a family sample enriched for alcoholism
Interhemispheric insular and inferior frontal connectivity are associated with substance abuse in a psychiatric population
Brain structure in adolescents and young adults with alcohol problems: systematic review of imaging studies
The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST): development, reliability and feasibility
Neuroanatomical correlates of extraversion and neuroticism
Regional gray matter deficits in alcohol dependence: a meta-analysis of voxel-based morphometry studies
Clinical and pathological features of alcohol- related brain damage
Interrelations between pain and alcohol: an integrative review
Annual Research Review: Discovery science strategies in studies of the pathophysiology of child and adolescent psychiatric disorders - promises and limitations
Correlation of brain cortical thickness with neuroticism
(A) Left insula cortex thickness. (B) Right fusiform cortex thickness. HC, healthy comparisons; AUD, alcohol use disorders. P-values for the correlations in HC and AUD are both shown.
Validation result using the Human Connectome Project data set
(A) Correlation of neuroticism with AUD. The dot in AUD group indicates an extreme neuroticism score. (B) Correlation of the left insula cortex thickness with neuroticism score. P-values for the correlations in HC and AUDS are both shown. HC, healthy comparisons; AUD, alcohol use disorders.
Vertex-based analysis of the brain cortical regions
(A) Left insula. (B) Right fusiform. Vertices in red represent the region with P-value less than 0.05.
Summary of the AUD subjects and health controls used in this study.
Variables	HC (n=65)	AUD (n=65)	 	Demographics	 	Age	44.2 (18.6)	45.6 (17.6)	 	Sex (Female)	37 (56.9%)	33 (50.8%)	 	Race (White)	50 (76.9%)	49 (75.4%)	 	IQ	101.6 (11.9)	101.4 (12.9)	 	Socioeconomic status	44.0 (14.4)	44.8 (10.6)	 	Handedness	75.3 (28.5)	71.2 (37.4)	 	Traumatic events*	34 (52.3%)	51 (78.5%)	 	Age at drinking onset	17.5 (4.0)	16.8 (2.6)	 	Tobacco use status*	 	Never used tobacco	35 (53.9%)	13 (20.0%)	 	Past tobacco user	19 (29.2%)	29 (44.6%)	 	Current tobacco user	11 (16.9%)	23 (35.4%)	 	Marijuana use status*	 	Never used marijuana	34 (52.3%)	12 (18.5%)	 	Past marijuana user	24 (36.9%)	34 (52.3%)	 	Current marijuana user	7 (10.8%)	19 (29.2%)	 	Psychiatric comorbidity	 	Number of Comorbidities	 	0		31 (47.7%)	 	1		17 (26.2%)	 	2		7 (10.8%)	 	3		6 (9.2%)	 	>3		4 (6.1%)	 	Top 3 comorbidities	 	Cannabis abuse/dependence		15 (23.1%)	 	Major depressive disorder		14 (21.5%)	 	Cocaine abuse/dependence		8 (12.3%)	 	Global brain measurement	 	ICV (cm3)	1479.5 (128.8)	1491.3 (149.9)	 	lh_Thickness (mm)	2.49 (0.11)	2.48 (0.10)	 	rh_Thickness (mm)	2.48 (0.12)	2.47 (0.10)	 	
Notes: HC, healthy comparisons; AUD, alcohol use disorders. ICV, intracranial volume. lh, left hemisphere. rh, right hemisphere.
indicates P < 0.05.
Group differences among the five personality traits.
Personality	Descriptive statistics mean (sd)	 		Model-based group difference	 		 	HC	AUD	HC-AUD	FDR P value	 	Neuroticism	15.6 (5.7)	19.0 (7.8)	−3.5	0.043	 	Extraversion	31.8 (5.1)	29.7 (5.7)	2.0	0.196	 	Openness	31.5 (5.1)	32.7 (5.4)	−0.7	0.978	 	Agreeableness	34.7 (5.8)	35.1 (5.9)	−1.8	0.092	 	Conscientiousness	35.2 (6.4)	34.2 (8.8)	0.6	0.978	 	
Notes: HC, healthy comparisons; AUD, alcohol use disorders.
Highlights
Subjects with AUD diagnosis history had higher neuroticism scores than HCs.
Neuroticism was correlated with cortical thickness of insula and fusiform in AUDs.
The AUD-impacted insula cortical thickness-neuroticism correlation was replicated.
